# (I) C. PLINIVS ROMANO SVO S.

1. *Post aliquot[^1] annos insigne atque etiam memorabile populi Romani oculis
   spectaculum exhibuit publicum funus[^2] Vergini Rufi[^3], maximi et
   clarissimi ciuis, perinde felicis.*

- *aliquot* is undeclined; here fitting on *annos* inside the *post*.
- *oculis* is a dative of indirect object.
- *exhibuit* from *exhibeo, exhibere, exhibui, exhibitus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to present.
- *maximi et clarissimi ciuis* is a partitive genitive.

      After several years the public funeral of the equally fortunate Verinus
      Rufus, one of the greatest and brightest citizen, presented a conspicuous
      and even memorable spectacle to the eyes of the Roman people.

[^1]: **post aliquot annos:** i.e., it was several years since an occurance as
  memorable as that about to be mentioned. Verginius' death occured at the end
  of 97 AD.
[^2]: **publicum funus:** a signal honor, voted by the senate; the expense was
  defrayed sometimes by the public treasury, sometimes by voluntary
  contributions.
[^3]: **Vergini Rufi**: The 'grand old man' of that generation, consul for the
  third time in 97, as colleague of the emperor Nerva; he had been Pliny's
  guardian. **perinde felicis:** *not less fortunate*.

2. *Triginta annis[^4] gloriae suae superuixit; legit scripta de se carmina, legit
   historias[^5] et posteritati suae interfuit[^6].*

- *superuixit* from *supervivo, supervivere, supervixi* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to survive. Takes the dative: *gloriae suae*.
- *legit* from *lego, legere, legi, lectus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to read.
- *scripta* from *scribo, scribere, scripsi, scriptus* is the p.p.p., meaning to
  write. This is modifying *carmina*.
- *interfuit* from *intersum, interesse* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to take part in. Takes the dative *posteritati suae*.

    He survived his own glory within a period of 30 years; he read songs having
    been written about himself, he read histories and took part in his own
    legacies.

[^4]: **triginta annis:** ablative of duration of time, a construction which
  increases in frequency in the post-Augustan age. In both the elder and
  younger Pliny it almost entirely supplants the accusative of duration.
  **gloriae...supervixit:** *lived to enjoy his fame*.
[^5]: **historias:** in this connection it is intereting to read Ep. IX.19.
[^6]: **interfuit:** *learned the verdict of*.

3. *Perfunctus est tertio consulatu, ut summum fastigium priuati hominis
   impleret[^7], cum principis noluisset.*

- *perfunctus est* from *perfungor, perfungi, perfunctus sum* is 3rd singular
  perfect indicative, meaning to perform. This takes the ablative *tertio
  consulatu*.
- *impleret* from *impleo, implere, implevi, impletus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to fulfill. This is a final clause.
- *noluisset* from *nolo, nolle, nolui* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to wish not to.

    He performed a 3rd consulship, so that he might fulfill the highest honor of
    a private man, since he had not wanted the honor of the princeps.

[^7]: **fastigum...impleret:** a mixed metaphor. **privati hominis:** *of
  a subject*. **cum principis noluisset:** he had refused the purple after
  defeating Julius Vindex in 68, again after Galba's accession, the third time
  after Ortho's defeat at Bedriacum in 69. Juvenal VII.211, *quid enum Verginus
  armis. Debuit ulcisci magic, aut cum Vindice Galba.*

4. *Caesares[^8] quibus suspectus atque etiam inuisus uirtutibus[^9] fuerat
   euasit, reliquit incolumem optimum atque amicissimum, tamquam ad hunc ipsum
   honorem publici funeris reseruatus.*

- *quibus* is the dative of agent.
- *fuerat* is 3rd singular pluperfect active indicative.
- *suspectus fuerat* from *suspicio, suspicere, suspexi, suspectus* is 3rd
  singular pluperfect passive indicative, meaning to suspect.
- *inuisus fuerat* from *invideo, invidere, invidi, invisus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect passive indicative, meaning to envy.
- *euasit* from *evado, evadere, evasi, evasus*is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to evade.
- *reliquit* from *relinquo, relinquere, reliqui, relictus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to leave behind.
- *reseruatus* from *reservo, reservare* is the perfect passive participle,
  meaning to reserve.

    He evaded the Caesars by whom he had been suspected and even envied for his
    virtues, he left behind safe the best and friendliest Caesar, as if he had
    been reserved to this very honor of a public funeral.

[^8]: **Caesares:** Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian; the use of
  a personal direct object of *evadere* is noteworthy.
[^9]: **virtutibus:** causal. **optimum:** Nerva.

5. *Annum tertium et octogensimum excessit in altissima tranquillitate, pari
   ueneratione.*

- *excessit* from *excedo, excedere, excessi, excessus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to pass.
- *pari* from *par, paris*.

    He passed his 83rd year in the highest tranquility, with equal veneration.

6. *Usus est firma ualetudine, nisi quod solebant ei manus tremere, citra
   dolorem tamen.*

- *usus est* from *utor, uti, usus sum* is 3rd singular perfect indicative,
  meaning to use. This takes the ablative, which here is *firma ualetudine*.
- *solebant* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to become accustomed to. This takes complimentary
  infinitve *tremere*.
- *tremere* from *tremo, tremere, tremui, -* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to tremble.

    He enjoyed firm health, except that the hands for him were accustomed to
    tremble, yet short of pain.

7. *Aditus tantum mortis durior longiorque, sed hic ipse laudabilis.*

- Implied *erat*.

    Only the approach of death was harder and longer, but in this moment he
    himself was praiseworthy.

8. *Nam cum uocem praepararet acturus in consulatu principi gratias, liber quem
   forte acceperat grandiorem, et seni et stanti ipso pondere elapsus est.*

- *praepararet* from *praeparo, praeparare* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to prepare. This is subjunctive because it's in
  a circumstancial *cum* clause.
- *principi* is an indirect object dative.
- *acturus* from *ago, agere, egi, actus* is the future active participle,
  meaning to give thanks (fitting with *gratias*).
- *quem* is the relative pronoun, modifying *liber*.
- *acceperat* from *accipio, accipere, accepi, acceptus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active indicative, meaning to grasp.
- *et seni et stanti* is a dative of seperation.
- *stanti* from *sto, stare, steti, status* is the present active participle,
  meaning to stand.
- *ipso pondere* is an ablative of cause.
- *elapsus est* from *elabor, elabi, elapsus sum* is 3rd singular perfect
  indicative, meaning to escape.

    For when he, going to give thanks to the Princeps in the consulate, was
    preparing his voice, the rather large book which he had graspepd, slipped
    away because of its very weight from both an old and standing man.

9. *Hunc dum sequitur colligitque, per leue et lubricum pauimentum fallente
   uestigio cecidit coxamque fregit, quae parum apte collocata reluctante aetate
   male coiit.*

- *dum* clause taking indicative.
- *sequitur* from *sequor, sequi, secutus sum* is 3rd singular present
  indicative, meaning to follow.
- *colligit* from *colligo, colligere, collegi, collectus* is 3rd singular
  present active indicative, meaning to collect.
- *fallente* from *fallo, fallere, fefelli, falsus* is the present active
  participle, meaning to decieve.
- *fallente uestigio* is an ablative absolute.
- *cecidit* from *cado, cadere, cecidi, casus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to fall.
- *fregit* from *frango, frangere, fregi, fractus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to break.
- *collacata* from *colloco, collocare, collocavi, collocatus* is the perfect
  passive participle, meaning to place.
- *reluctante* from *reluctor, relictari, relictatus sum* is the present
  participle, meaning to resist.
- *reluctante aetate* is an ablative absolute.
- *coiit* from *coeo, coire, coivi, coitus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to mend.

    This while he followed and collected it, he fell traversing the smooth and
    slippery pavement with his step having been decieved and broke his hip,

10. *Huius uiri exsequiae magnum ornamentum principi magnum saeculo magnum etiam
    foro et rostris attulerunt.*

- *attulerunt* from *affero, afferre, attuli, allatus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to carry.

    The funeral rites of this man brought great decoration to the princeps, to
    the age, and also to the forum and to the rostra?

11. *Laudatus est a consule Cornelio Tacito; nam hic supremus felicitati eius
    cumulus accessit, laudator eloquentissimus.*

- *laudatus est* from *laudo, laudare, laudavi, laudatus* is 3rd singular
  perfect passive indicative, meaning to praise.
- *accessit* from *accedo, acccedere, accessi, accessus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to approach This takes a dative, and when doing so
  often is translated as 'to add to + dat'.
- Implied *erat* equating *laudator* and *eloquentissimus*.

    He was praised by the consul Cornelius Tacitus; for this greatest finishing
    touch added to his good fortune, the praiser was very eloquent.

12. *Et ille quidem plenus annis abit, plenus honoribus, illis etiam quos
    recusauit:*

- Instead of *plenus* modifying *ille*, given the parallel structure with
  *plenus honoribus*, I think it's its own thing, i.e. 'full with age, full with
  honor'.
- *abit* from *abeo, abire, abivi, abitus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to depart.
- *recusauit* from *recuso, recusare, recusavi, recusatus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to reject.
- *quos* is relative with antecedent *honoribus*, i.e. *Verginus* had many
  honors even though he had rejeceted many.

    and indeed that man died full with years full with honors, even those which
    he rejected.

13. *nobis tamen quaerendus ac desiderandus est ut exemplar aeui prioris, mihi
    uero praecipue, qui illum non solum publice quantum admirabar tantum
    diligebam;*

- *quaerendus est* from *quaero, quaerere, quaesivi, quaesitus* is the passive
  periphrastic, meaning to seek.
- *desiderandus est* from *desidero, desiderare* is the passive periphrastic,
  meaning to desire.
- *nobis* and *mihi* are dative of agent.
- *admirabar* from *admiror, admirari, admiratus sum* is 1st singular imperfect
  indicative, meaning to admire
- *diligebam* from *diligo, diligere, dilexi, dilectus* is 1st singular
  imperfect active indicative, meaning to love.
- *qui...diligebam* is an example of brachylogy. *non solum* often goes with
  *sed etiam*, here the *sed etiam privatim* is suppressed.

    Nevertheless he ought to be sought and desired by us as an example of the
    previous age, in truth especially by me, who not only admired that man
    publicly, but also privately, as I admired him as much as I loved him.

14. *primum quod utrique eadem regio, municipia finitima, agri etiam
    possessionesque coniunctae, praeterea quod ille mihi tutor relictus adfectum
    parentis exhibuit.*

- There is an implied *est* between *utrique* and *eadem regio*, which turns the
  dative *utrique* into a dative of possesor. This possesses *eadem regio* and
  *agri possesionesque coniunctae*.
- *coniuctae* from *coniungo, coniungere, coniunxi, coniunctus* is the perfect
  passive participle, meaning to connect.
- *quod* is the conjuction.
- I reduplicated *mihi* inside *adfectum parentis*, haivng already been used
  inside the *relictus* describing *ille tutor*.
- *exhibuit* from *exhibeo, exhibere, exhibui, exhibitus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to present.

    First since both of us have the same region, a neighboring municipality, and
    also have connected fields and possesions, in addition since that guardian,
    having been left behind for me, exhibited the affection of a parent to me. 

15. *Sic candidatum me suffragio ornauit;*

- *me* with *candidatum* not *suffragio*.
- *ornauit* from *orno, ornare* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative,
  meaning to equip.

    Thus he honored my candidacy with his vote;

16. *sic ad omnes honores meos ex secessibus accucurrit, cum iam pridem eiusmodi
    officiis renuntiasset;*

- *accucurrit* from *accurro, accurrere, accucurri, accursus* is 3rd singular
  perfect acitve indicative, meaning to run to.
- *iam primdem* is translated as 'long ago'.
- *renuntiasset* from *renuntio, renuntiare* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to reject. This is subjunctive because it's setting off
  a circumstantial *cum* clause.
- *officiis* is an ablative of seperation.

    Thus he rushed to all my honors from withdrawal, when long ago he had
    renounced from duties of this sort.

17. *sic illo die quo sacerdotes solent nominare quos dignissimos sacerdotio
    iudicant, me semper nominabat.*

- *solent* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is 3rd plural present active
  indicative, meaning to be accustomed to. This takes *nominare* is
  a complimentary infinitive.
- *nominare* from *nomino, nominare* is the present active infinitive, meaning
  to name.

18. *Quin etiam in hac nouissima ualetudine, ueritus ne forte inter quinqueuiros
    crearetur, qui minuendis publicis sumptibus iudicio senatus constituebantur,
    cum illi tot amici senes consularesque superessent, me huius aetatis per
    quem excusaretur elegit, his quidem uerbis:*

- *ueritus* from *vereor, vereri, veritus sum* is the perfect participle,
  meaning to revere.
- *crearetur* from *creo, creare* is 3rd singular imperfect passive subjunctive,
  meaning to create.
- *minuendis* from *minuo, minuere, minui, minutus* is the gerund(ive), meaning
  to lessen.
- *constituebantur* from *constituo, constituere, constitui, constitutus* is 3rd
  plural imperfect passive indicative, meaning to set up/erect.
- *superessent* from *supersum, superesse, superfui, superfuturus* is 3rd plural
  imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to be left over/survive/be in excess to.
- *excusaretur* from *excuso, excusare* is 3rd singular imperfect passive
  subjunctive, meaning to excuse/justify/explain.
- *elegit* from *eligo, eligere, elegi, electus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to pick out/choose.

19. *'Etiam si filium haberem, tibi mandarem.'*

- *haberem* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 1st singular imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to hold.
- *mandarem* from *mando, mandare, mandavi, mandatus* is 1st singular imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to entrust/command.

Quibus ex causis necesse est tamquam immaturam mortem eius in sinu tuo defleam,
si tamen fas est aut flere aut omnino mortem uocare, qua tanti uiri mortalitas
magis finita quam uita est. Viuit enim uiuetque semper, atque etiam latius in
memoria hominum et sermone uersabitur, postquam ab oculis recessit. Volo tibi
multa alia scribere, sed totus animus in hac una contemplatione defixus est.
Verginium cogito, Verginium uideo, Verginium iam uanis imaginibus, recentibus
tamen, audio adloquor teneo; cui fortasse ciues aliquos uirtutibus pares et
habemus et habebimus, gloria neminem. Vale.
