# (XX) C. Plinius Tacito Suo S.

*Letter to Tacitus of the experience of Pliny and his mother during the
eruption of Versuvius.*

1. *Ais te adductum litteris quas exigenti tibi de morte avunculi mei scripsi
   cupere cognoscere quos ego Miseni relictus (id enim ingressus abruperam) non
   solum metus verum etiam casus pertulerim.*

- *ais* from *aio* is 2nd singular present active indicative, meaning to say.
- *adductum* from *adduco, adducere, adduxi, adductus* is the p.p.p., meaning to
  lead up/to/away. This is modifying *te*.
- *litteris* is a ablative of means.
- The antecedent of *quas* is *litteris*.
- *exigenti* from *exigo, exigere, exegi, exactus* is the present active
  participle, meaning to drive out. This fits with *tibi*. 
- *avunculi mei* is a genitive of possesion.
- *scripsi* from *scibo, scribere, scripsi, scriptus* is 1st singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to write.
- *cupere* from *cupio, cupere, cupivi, cupitus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to wish/long/be eager for. I think this sets off indirect
  speech.
- *cognoscere* from *cognosco, cognoscere, cognovi, cognitus* is the present
  active infinitive, meaning to become acquainted with.
- *Miseni* is Locative.
- *relictus* from *relinquo, relinquere, reliqui, relictus* is the p.p.p.,
  meaning to leave behind.
- *ingressus* from *ingredior, ingredi, ingressus sum* is the perfect
  participle, meaning to begin.
- *abruperam* from *abrumpo, abrumpere, abrupi, abruptus* is 1st singular
  pluperfect active indicatice, meaning to break.
- *non solum...verum etiam* is a construction meaning 'not only...but also'
- *pertulerim* from *perfero, perferre, pertuli, perlatus* is 1st singular
  perfect active subjunctive, meaning to carry through/endure to the end. This
  is subjunctive because it's indirect question.

    You say that you desire, having been lead by the letter which I wrote to you
    demanding about the death of my uncle, to know (For having begun I had broke
    off it) not only the fears but also the calamaties which I, having been
    abandoned at Misenum, endured.

2. *'Quamquam animus meminisse horret, incipiam.'*

- Quote from line 4 of the Aeneid.
- *meminisse* from *memini, meminisse* is the perfect active infinitive, meaning
  to remember.
- *horret* from *horreo, horrere, horrui* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to dread.
- *incipiam* from *incipio, incipere, incepi, inceptus* is 1st singular future
  active indicative, meaning to begin.

    'although my mind dreads to remember it, I will begin.'

3. *Profecto avunculo ipse reliquum tempus studiis (ideo enim remanseram)
   inpendi:*

- *profecto* from *proficiscor, proficisci, profectus sum* is the perfect
  participle, meaning to depart. *profecto avunculo* therefore is ablative
  absolute.
- *studiis* is probably dative of reference.
- *remanseram* from *remaneo, remanere, remanui, remansus* is 1st singular
  pluperfect active indicative, meaning to remain.
- When desperately trying to make sense of this sentence, I found in Traupman
  that *inp = imp*, so then *inpendo* $\to$ *impendo*.
- *inpendo* from *impendo, impendere, impendi, impensus* is 1st singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to spend.

    With uncle having departed I myself spent the remaining time (indeed for the
    reason that I had remained) on studies.

4. *mox balineum, cena, somnus inquietus et brevis.*

- *asyndeton* describes this phenomina of having no conjunctions (i.e. the *et*
  we want so dearly)

    Soon bath, dinner, a restless and short sleep.

5. *Praecesserat per multos dies tremor terrae minus formidolosus quia Campaniae
   solitus.*

- *pracesserat* from *praecedo, praecedere, praecessi, praecessus* is 3rd
  singular pluperfect active indicative, meaning to go before.
- *solitus* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is the perfect passive participle,
  meaning to be in the habit of.

    The trembling of the earth, less scary because (it is) usual for Campania, had
    preceeded for many days.

6. *Illa vero nocte ita invaluit ut non moveri omnia sed verti crederentur.*

- **Not sure what *vero* is doing here...**
- *illa vero nocte* is an ablative of time at which.
- *invaluit* from *invalesco, invalescere, invalui* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to grown strong.
- *moveri* from *moveo, movere, movi, motusu* is the present passive infinitive,
  meaning to move.
- *verti* from *verto, vertere, verti, versus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to turn.
- *crederentur* from *credo, credere, credidi, creditus* is 3rd plural imperfect
  passive subjunctive, meaning to believe. This is subjunctive because it's in
  a result clause introduced by *ut*. Also signified by the *ut*.

    In truth at that night it thus grew stronger so that all things might be
    believed to not move but to be overthrown.

7. *Inrumpit cubiculum meum mater:*

- *inrumpit* from *inrumpo, inrumpere, inrupi, inruptus* is 3rd singular present
  active indicative, meaning to burst into.
- Note *meum* goes with *cubiculum* gender wise, but whose other mother would
  it be.

    My mother burst into my bedroom:

8. *surgebam, invicem, si quiesceret, excitaturus.*

- *surgebam* from *surgo, surgere, surrexi, surrectus* is 1st singular imperfect
  active indicative, meaning to lift.
- *quiesceret* from *quiesco, quiescere, quievi, quietus* is 3rd singular
  imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to rest. This is in the protasis of
  a present contrary to fact conditional.
- *excitaturus* from *excito, excitare, excitavi, excitatus* is the future
  active participle, meaning to wake up

    I was rising, in turn going to wake her up, if she were sleeping.

9. *Residimus in area domus, quae mare a tectis modico spatio dividebat.*

- *residimus* from *resido, residere, residi* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to sit down.
- *area* is ablative, *domus* is genitive.
- *dividebat* from *divido, dividere, divisi, divisus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active indicative, meaning to divide.
- *modico spatio* is an ablative of means.

    We sat down in the courtyard of the house, which was dividing the sea from
    the houses with a small space.

10. *Dubito constantiam vocare an inprudentiam debeam; agebam enim
    duodevicesimum annum: posco librum Titi Livi et quasi per otium lego atque
    etiam, ut coeperam, excerpo.*

- *dubito* from *dubito, dubitare, dubitavi, dubitatus* is 1st singular present
  active indicative, meaning to doubt.
- *vocare* from *voco, vocare, vocavi, vocatus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to call.
- *debeam* from *debeo, debere, debui, debitus* is 1st singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to owe. This is subjunctive because this is an indirect
  question.
- *agebam* from *ago, agere, egi, actus* is 1st singular imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to drive.
- *posco* from *posco, poscere, poposci* is 1st singular present active
  indicative, meaning to ask.
- *lego* from *lego, legere, legi, lectus* is 1st singular present active
  indicative, meaning to read (or to bequeath).
- *coeperam* from *coepio, coepere, coepi, coeptus* is 1st singular pluperfect
  active indicative, meaning to begin.
- *excerpo* from *excerpo, excerpere, excerpsi, excerptus* is 1st singular
  present active indicative, meaning to pick out. Lewis and Short says it can be
  translated as 'to make extracts'.

    I doubt whether I ought to call it perserverance or ignorance; for I was
    spending my 18th year: I ask for a book of Titus Livus and as if during
    leisure I read it and in addition, as I had began, make exctracts.

11. *Ecce, amicus avunculi, qui nuper ad eum ex Hispania venerat, ut me et
    matrem sedentes, me vero etiam legentem videt, illius patientiam,
    securitatem meam corripit: nihilo segnius ego intentus in librum.*

- *venerat* from *venio, venire, veni, ventus* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
  indicative, meaning to come.
- *sedentes* from *sedeo, sedere, sedi, sessus* is the present active
  participle, meaning to sit.
- *legentem* from *lego, legere, legi, lectus* is the present active participle,
  meaning to read.
- *videt* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to see.
- *corripit* from *corripio, corripere, corripui, correptus* is 3rd singular
  present active indicative, meaning to censure.
- *intentus* is 

    Look, a friend of uncle, who recently had came from Spain to him, as he sees
    me and my mother sitting, in truth me even reading, he censures the
    patience of that one, my carelessness: by nothing sluggish I am eager about
    the book.

12. *Iam hora diei prima, et adhuc dubius et quasi languidus dies.*
13. *Iam quassatis circumiacentibus tectis, quamquam in aperto loco, angusto
    tamen, magnus et certus ruinae metus.*
14. *Tum demum excedere oppido visum: sequitur vulgus attonitum, quodque in
    pavore simile prudentiae, alienum consilium suo praefert ingentique agmine
    abeuntis premit et inpellit.*
15. *Egressi tecta consistimus.*
16. *Multa ibi miranda, multas formidines patimur.*
17. *Nam vehicula quae produci iusseramus, quamquam in planissimo campo, in
    contrarias patres agebantur ac ne lapidibus quidem fulta in eodem vestigio
    quiescebant.*
18. *Praeterea mare in se resorberi et tremore terrae quasi repelli videbamus.*
19. *Certe processerat litus multaque animalia maris siccis harenis detinebat.*
20. *Ab altero latere nubes atra et horrenda ignei spiritus tortis vibratisque
    discursibus rupta in longas flammarum figuras dehiscebat: fulguribus illae
    et similes et maiores erant.*

21. *Tum vero idem ille ex Hispania amicus acrius et instantius 'si frater'
    inquit 'tuus, tuus avunculus vivit, vult esse vos salvos:'*

- *acriusu* and *instantius* are comparative adverbs, meaning sharply and
  vehemently respectively.
- *tuus, tuus* is a chiasmus.
- *vivit* from *vivo, vivere, vixi, victus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to live.
- *vult* from *volo, velle, volui* is 3rd singular present active indicative,
  meaning to wish. This takes *esse* as a complimentary infinitive.

    Then in truth that same friend from Spain said more sharply and vehemently
    'if your father, your uncle lives, he wishes you to be safe:'

22. *'si periit, superstites voluit:'*

- *periit* from *pereo, perire, perivi(ii), peritus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to die.
- I took the *esse vos* from the previous part as implied, and made
  *superstites* substantative.

    If he has died, he wished you to be a surviving person:

23. *'proinde quid cessatis evadere?'*

- *quid* is the interrogative pronoun here.
- *cessatis* from *cesso, cessare* is 2nd plural present active indicative,
  meaning to hold back.
- *evadere* from *evado, evadere, evasi, evasus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to evade.

    'So then why do you all delay to escape?'

24. *Respondimus non commissuros nos ut de salute illius incerti nostrae
    consuleremus.*

- *respondimus* from *respondeo, respondere, respondi, responsus* is 1st plural
  perfect active indicative, meaning to answer.
- *commissuros* from *committo, committere, commisi, commissus* is the future
  active participle, meaning to bring together.
- *consuleremus* from *consulo, consulere, consului, consultus* is 1st plural
  imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to consult. This is a jussive noun
  clause. We must also add a *saluti* to fit with this.

    We replied that we are not going to unite so as we might consult for our
    safety uncertain concerning the safety of that man.

25. *Non moratus ultra proripit se effusoque cursu periculo aufertur.*

- *moratus* from *moro, morari, moratus sum* is the perfect participle, meaning
  to delay.
- *ultra* here is the adverbial usage, not prepositional.
- *proripit* from *proripio, proripere, proripui, proreptus* is 3rd singular
  present active indicative, meaning snatch away.
- *effuso* from *effundo, effundere, effudi, effusus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to pour forth.
- *periculo* is a dative of reference and *effuso cursu* is an ablative of
  manner.
- *aufertur* from *aufero, auferre, abstuli, ablatus* is 3rd singular present
  passive indicative, meaning to bear/carry/take away/off.

    Not having delayed further he drags himself away and is carried away from
    danger with a poured fourth run.

26. *Nec multo post illa nubes descendere in terras, operire maria: cinxerat
    Capreas et absconderat: Miseni quod procurrit abstulerat.*

- *multo* is an ablative of degree of difference.
- Note: I cannot put the *multo* into the *post* because it doesn't agree in
  gender with *illa*.
- *descendere* from *descendo, descendere, descendi, descensus* is 3rd plural
  perfect active indicative, meaning to descend.
- *operire* from *operio, operire, operui, opertus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to cover.
- Both of the infinitives are historical infinitives.
- *cinxerat* from *cingo, cingere, cinxi, cinctus* is 3rd singular pluperfect
  active indicative, meaning to surround.
- *absconderat* from *abscondo, abscondere, abscondi, absconditus* is 3rd
  singular pluperfect active indicative, meaning to conceal.
- *procurrit* from *procurro, procurrere, pro(cu)curri, procursum* is 3rd
  singular present active indicative, meaning to jut forth.
- *abstulerat* from *aufero, auferre, abstuli, ablatus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active indicative, meaning to bear/carry/take away/off.
- To translate this last part we must insert an *id*. *Miseni* is a locative.

    Nor after those things by much were the clouds descending onto the lands,
    covering the seas: it had surrounded Capri and had concealed it: it had carried
    away that which juts forth at Misenum.

27. *Tum mater orare, hortari, iubere quoquo modo fugerem; posse enim iuvenem,
    se et annis et corpore grave bene morituram, si mihi causa mortis non
    fuisset.*

- This string of infinitives are historical infinitives.
- *orare* from *oro, orare* is the present active infinitive, meaning to beg.
- *hortari* from *hortor, hortari, hortatus sum* is the present infinitive,
  meaning to urge.
- *iubere* from *iubeo, iubere, iussi, iussus* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to order. Normally this takes an infinitive, except in post-classical
  Latin, which is where Pliny is.
- *fugerem* is an indirect command.
- *posse* from *posssum, posse, potui* is the present active infinitve.
- *annis* and *corpore* are ablative of respect.
- *morituram* from *morior, moriri, moritus sum* is the future participle,
  meaning to die.
- *fuisset* from *sum, esse, fui, futurus* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
  subjunctive. This is subjunctive because it's in a subordinate inside of
  indirect speech.
- Notice that *causa* is predicate nominative.

    Then my mother begged, urged, and ordered me to flee in whichever way; that
    indeed I could as a young man, she both heavy in years and body would die
    well, if the cause of death for me had not been her.

28. *Ego contra salvum me nisi una non futurum: dein manum eius amplexus, addere
    gradum cogo.*

- *futurum* from *sum, esse, fui, futurum* is the future active participle,
  meaning to be.
- *amplexus* from *aplector, amplecti, amplexus sum* is the perfect participle,
  meaning to clasp.
- *addere* from *addo, addere, addidi, additus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to increase.
- *cogo* from *cogo, cogere, coegi, coactus* is 1st singular present active
  indicative, meaning to compel.

    I, in turn, say that I would not be safe if not together: then having
    clasped her hand, I compel her to increase her pace.

29. *Paret aegre incusatque se quod me moretur.*

- *paret* from *pareo, parere, parui, paritus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to obey.
- *incusat* from *incuso, incusare* is 3rd singular present active indicative,
  meaning to accuse.
- *moretur* from *moror, morari, moratus sum* is 3rd singular present
  subjunctive, meaning to delay. This is subjunctive of alleged reason (this
  usually appears in quod clause).
  
    She obeys with difficulty and accusses herself because she delays me.

30. *Iam cinis, adhuc tamen rarus: respicio, densa caligo tergis imminebat, quae
    nos torentis modo infusa terrae sequebatur.*

- *respicio* from *respicio, respicere, respexi, respectus* is 1st singular
  present active indicative, meaning to look back at.
- *imminebat* from *immineo, imminere* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to threaten. This takes a dative, which is why *tergis* is
  dative.
- *infusa* from *infundo, infundere, infudi, infusus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to pour, this takes a dative which is *terrae* here.
  *infusa terrae* is in the nominative case.
- *sequebatur* from *sequor, sequi, secutus sum* is 3rd singular imperfect
  indicative, meaning to follow.
- *modo* is an ablative of manner.

    Now ash, thus far nevertheless is thin: I look back, the dense darkness was
    threatening our backs, which, having been poured on the land, was bollowing
    us with the manner of a torrent.

31. *'Deflectamus' inquam 'dum videmus ne in via strati comitantium turba in
    tenebris obteramur.'*

- *deflectamus* from *deflecto, deflectere, deflexi, deflexus* is 1st plural
  present active subjunctive, meaning to band downward. I think this is an
  independent usage, namely hortatory.
- *strati* from *sterno, sternere, stravi, stratus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to scatter.
- *comitantium* from *commeo, commeare, commeavi, commeatus* (this is
  a frequentitive form) is the present active participle, meaning to follow.
- *obteramur* from *obtero, obterere, obtrivi, obtritus* is 1st plural present
  passive subjunctive, meaning to crush. This is subjunctive because it's in
  a negative purpose clause set off by *ne*.

    I said 'Let us change course while we see lest we are flattned by the crowd
    of those following on the road and we are crushed in the shadows.

32. *Vix consideramus, et nox, non qualis inlunis aut nubila, sed qualis in
    locis clausis lumine extincto.*

- *consideramus* from *consido, considere, considi, consessus* is 1st plural
  present active indicative, meaning to sit down.
- Here *qualis* takes on it's relative meaning, meaning 'like'. I couldn't find
  a coordinating meaning for *qualis...qualis*.
- *extincto* from *extinguo, extinguere, extinxi, extinctus* is the perfect
  passive participle, meaning to extinguish. *lumine extincto* is an ablative
  absolute.

    We hardly had sat down, when the night, not like moonless or cloudy, but
    like in enclosed places with the light having been extinguished.

33. *Audires ululatus feminarum, infantum quiritatus, clamores virorum:*

- *Audires* from *audio, audire, audivi, auditus* is 2nd singular imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to hear. This is subjunctive because it's a
  potential independent usage.
- Both *feminarum*, *quiritatus* and *vivorum* are subjective genitives.

    You would be hearing the women's shrieks, the children's wails, the men's
    shouts.

34. *alii parentes, alii liberos, alii coniuges vocibus requirebant, vocibus
    noscitabant: hi suum casum, illi suorum miserabantur: erant qui metu mortis
    mortem precarentur: multi ad deos manus tollere, plures nusquam iam deos
    ullos, aeternamque illam et novissimam noctem mundo interpretabantur.*

- *vocibus* is an ablative of means.
- *requirebant* from *requiro, requirere, requisivi, requisitus* is 3rd plural
  imperfect active indicative, meaning to pine for.
- *noscitabant* from *noscito, noscitare* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to recognize.
- *miserabantur* from *miseror, miserari, miseratus sum* is 3rd plural
  imperfect indicative, meaning to pity.
- *erant* is 3rd plural imperfect active indicative.
- *metu* is an ablative of cause.
- *precarentur* from *precor, precari, precatus sum* is 3rd plural imperfect
  subjunctive, meaning to beg. This is a relative clause of characteristic,
  which can be seen as there is an indefinte antecendent.
- *tollere* from *tollo, tollere, sustuli, sublatus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to lift. I think this is a historical infinitive.
- *plures* is the comparative of *multus*.
- I think there is an implicit *esse* in the sentence, which sets off indirect
  speech from *interpretabantur*.
- *mundo* I think is a dative of possesor.
- *interpretabantur* from *interpretor, interpretari, interpretatus sum* is 3rd
  plural imperfect indicative, meaning to explain/interpret.

    some were seeking parents, others children, others spouses with their
    voices, they were recognizing them by their voices: These were feeling sorry
    for their own plight, those were feeling sorry of themselves; there were
    people of the sort who were begging for death because of the fear of death: many
    were raising their hands to the gods, many more were interpreting that now
    any gods were nowhere, and it was that eternal and last night for the world.

35. *Nec defuerunt qui fictis mentitisque terroribus vera pericula augerent.*

- *defuerunt* from *desum, deesse, defui, defuturus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to be wanting/lacking. litotes
- *fictis mentitisque terroribus* is an ablative absolute.
- *fictis* from *fingo, fingere, finxi, fictus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to make up.
- *mentitis* from *mentior, mentiri, mentitus sum* is the perfect participle,
  meaning to lie/decieve/invent.
- *augerent* from *augeo, augere, auxi, auctus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to increase/augment. This is subjunctive because it's
  a relative clause of characteristic.

    Nor were they absent of the sort who might augment the genuine dangers with
    false and invented terrors.

36. *Aderant qui Miseni illud ruisse, illud ardere, falso sed credentibus,
    nuntiabant.*

- *aderant* from *adsum, edesse, adfui, adfuturus* is 3rd plural imperfect
  active indicative, meaning to be near/present.
- *ruisse* from *ruo, ruere, rui, rutus* is the perfect active infinitive,
  meaning to destroy/ruin.
- *ardere* from *ardeo, ardere, arsi, arsus* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to be on fire or to burn.
- The above two infinitives are setting off indirect speech.
- *falso sed credentibus* is an ablative absolute.
- *credentibus* from *credo, credere, credidi, creditus* is the present active
  participle, meaning to trust.
- *nuntiabant* from *nuntio, nuntiare, nuntiavi, nuntiatus* is 3rd plural
  imperfect active indicative, meaning to announce/report/convey/deliver.

    They were present who, were announcing, falsely but to the believing
    people, that at Miseni that had fallen, that was on fire.

37. *Paulum reluxit; quod non dies nobis sed adventantis ignis indicium
    videbatur.*

- *paulum* here is the adverbial usage.
- *reluxit* from *reluceo, relucere, reluxi, -* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to grow bright again.
- *adventantis* from *advento, adventare, adventavi, adventatus* is the present
  active participle, meaning
  to approach.
- *videbatur* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  passive indicative, meaning to seem. The note says to translate this as *was
  seen* not *seemed*.

    it grew somewhat brighter again; which was seen to us not as day,
    but a sign of approaching fire.

38. *Et ignis quidem longius substitit, tenebrae rursus, cinis rursus multus et
    gravis.*

- *longius* is the comparative adverb from *longe, longius, longissime*.
- *substitit* from *subsisto, subsistere, subsititi* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to halt.
- *tenebrae* is plural nominative, but it means darkess then.

    and indeed the fired halted more distantly, the darkness again, the ash
    again much and heavy.

39. *Hunc identidem adsurgentes excutiebamus: operti alioqui atque etiam oblisi
    pondere essemus.*

- *adsurgentes* from *adsurgo, adsurgere, adsurrexi, adsurrectus* is the
  present active participle, meaning to rise/stand up.
- *excutiebamus* from *excutio, excutere, excussi, excussus* is 1st plural
  imperfect active indicative, meaning to shake out/off.
- *operti* from *operio, operire, operui, opertus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to cover/bury.
- *oblisi essemus* from *oblido, oblidere, oblisi, oblisus* is 1st plural
  pluperfect passive subjunctive, meaning to crush.
- *operti essemus* from *operio, operire, operui, opertus* is 1st plural
  pluperfect passive subjunctive, meaning to cover/bury. This, and the previous
  verb, are an independent usage, the potential.
- *pondere* is an ablative of cause.

    We repeatedly rising were shaking off this [ash]: otherwise we would have
    been buried and furthermore crushed because of the weight.

40. *Possem gloriari non gemitum mihi, non vocem parum fortem in tantis
    periculis excidisse, nisi me cum omnibus, omnia mecum perire misero, magno
    tamen mortalitatis solacio credidissem.*

- *possem* from *possum, posse, potui* is 1st singular imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to be able.
- *gloriari* from *glorior, gloriari, gloriatus sum* is the present infinitive,
  meaning to boast/brag.
- *mihi* is a dative of seperation. *excidisse* takes the dative.
- *excidisse* from *excideo, exicidere, excidi, excissus* is the perfect active
  infinitive, meaning to demolist/destroy.
- *perire* from *pereo, perire, perivi, peritus* is the present active
  infintive, meaning to die.
- *mortalitatis* is an objective genitivie.
- *credidissem* from *credo, credere, credidi, creditus* is 1st singular
  pluperfect active subjunctive, meaning to trust.

    I might able to boast that no groan, no insufficiently courageous voice
    voice had escaped from me in so great dangers, except I might have believed
    that I was dying with everything else, all things were perishing with
    myself with wretched, yet great comfort of mortality.

41. *Tandem illa caligo tenuata quasi in fumum nebulamve discessit: mox dies
    verus, sol etiam effulsit, luridus tamen, qualis esse, cum deficit, solet.*

- *tenuata* from *tenuo, tenuare* is the perfect passive participle, meaning to
  make thin.
- *discessit* from *dicedo, discedere, discessi, descessus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to depart.
- *effulsit* from *effulgeo, effulgere, effulsi* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to glitter.
- *deficit* from *deficio, deficere, defeci, defectus* is 3rd singular present
  active indicative, meaning to fail.
- *solet* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to be accustomed.

    Finally that having been reduced darkness withdrew as if into smoke or mist:
    Soon genuine day, even the sun shone forth, yet murky, as it is
    accustomed to be when it is an eclipse.

42. *Occursabant trepidantibus adhuc oculis mutata omnia altoque cinere,
    tamquam nive, obducta.*

- *occursabant* from *occurso, occursare, occursavi, occursatus* is 3rd plural
  imperfect active indicative, meaning to run forth to meet. 
- The book has *trepidantibus* (present participle from *trepido, trepidare,
  trepidavi, trepidatus*, meaning to tremble) as a hypallage, i.e. a modifier
  is syntactically linked to an item other than the one that it modifies
  semantically 'restless night'.
- *mutata* from *muto, mutare* is the perfect passive participle, meaning to
  move.
- *obducta* from *obduco, obducere, obduxi, obductus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to cover over.

    All things, having been moved and covered by deep ash, just like snow, were
    running forth to meet with yet trembling eyes.

43. *Regressi Misenum, curatis utcumque corporibus suspensam dubiamque noctem
    spe ac metu exegimus.*

- *regressi* from *regredior, regredi, regressus sum* is the perfect partciple,
  meaning to return.
- *curatis* from *curo, curare* is the perfect passive participle, meaning to
  attend to. *curatis corporibus* is an ablative absolute.
- *exegimus* from *exigo, exigere, exegi, exactus* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to examine.

    Having returned to Miseni, with bodies somehow having been healed we passed
    the suspenseful and doubtful night because of hope and fear.

44. *Metus praevalebat: nam et tremor terrae perseverabat et plerique lymphati
    terrificis vaticinationibus et sua et aliena mala ludificabantur.*

- *praevalebat* from *praevaleo, praevalere, praevalui* is 3rd singular
  imperfect active indicative, meaning to prevail.
- *perseverabat* from *persevero, perseverare* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to persist.
- *lymphati* from *lympho, lymphare* is the perfect passive participle, meaning
  to derage, drive crazy.
- *terrificis vaticinationibus* is ablative of means.
- *ludificabantur* from *ludificor, ludificari, ludificatus sum* is 3rd plural
  imperfect passive indicative, meaning to make fun/sport of.

    Fear was prevailing: for both the trembling of the earth was persisting
    and many having been frenzied  were deluding both their own and others
    misfortunes by means of terrifying prophecies,

45. *Nobis tamen ne tunc quidem, quamquam et expertis periculum et
    exspectantibus, abeundi consilium, donec de avunculo nuntius.*

- *ne...quidem* = 'not even'.
- *exspectantibus* from *exspecto, exspectare* is the present active
  participle, meaning to lookout for, await; expect, anticipate.
- *abeundi* from *abeo, abire, abivi, abitus* is the future passive participle,
  meaning to depart. This is the gerund. 

    Nevertheless not even then did we have a plan of departing, although both
    having experianced danger and expecting it, until the message concerning
    our uncle.

46. *Haec nequaquam historia digna non scripturus leges et tibi, scilicet qui
    requisisti, inputabis, si digna ne epistula quidem videbuntur.*

- *digna* takes an ablative.
- *scripturus* from *scribo, scribere, scripsi, scriptus* is the future active
  participle, meaning to write.
- *leges* from *lego, legere, legi, lectus* is 2nd singular future active
  indicative, meaning to read.
- *requisisti* from *requiro, requirere, requisivi, requisistus* is 2nd
  singular perfect active indicative, meaning to require.
- *inputabis* from *imputo, imputare* is 2nd singular future active indicative,
  meaning to charge.
- *videbuntur* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd plural future passive
  indicative, meaning to seem.

    You, not intending to write, shall read these things by no means worthy of
    history, of course which you asked for, and you will charge yourself, if they
    seem not even worthy of the letter.

47. *Vale.*

- *vale* from *valeo, valere, valui, valitus* is the present active imperative,
  meaning to be strong, but also is a farewell in this form.

    Farewell.
