# (XCVI) C. PLINIVS TRAIANO IMPERATORI

1. *Sollemne est mihi, domine, omnia de quibus dubito ad te referre.*

- *est* is the existential *esse*.
- *dubito* from *dubito, dibutare* is 1st singular present active indicative,
  meaning to doubt.
- *referre* from *refero, referre, rettuli, relatus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to bring.

    It is customary to me, O lord, to report all things to you concerning which
    I doubt.

2. *Quis enim potest melius uel cunctationem meam regere uel ignorantiam
   instruere?*

- *quis* is the interrogative pronoun here, and it's nominative with antecedent
  being the *domine*.
- *potest* from *possum, posse, potui* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to be able.
- *melius* is a comaprative adverb here.
- *regere* from *rego, regere, rexi, rectus* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to guide.
- *instruere* from *instruo, instruere, instruxi, instructus* is the present
  active infinitive, meaning to construct.

    For who is better able to either guide my hesitation or instruct my
    ignorance?

3. *Cognitionibus de Christianis interfui numquam: ideo nescio quid et quatenus
   aut puniri soleat aut quaeri.*

- *interfui* from *intersum, interesse, interfui, interfuturus* is 1st singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to be/lie between. This takes a dative
  (*cognitionibus*) and is translated as 'I am present/attend (+ dat.)' in that
  case.
- *nescio* from *nescio, nescire, nescivi, nescitus* is 1st singular present
  actve indicative, meaning to not know (how).
- *puniri* from *punior, puniri, punitus sum* is the present infinitive, meaning
  to punish.
- *soleat* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is 3rd singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to be accustomed to. This is subjunctive because it is
  an indirect question.
- *quaeri* from *quaero, quaerere, quaesivi, quaesitus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to seek.

    I have never attended examinations concerning Christians: therefore I do not
    know what and to what extent it is accustomed to either punished or be
    sought out.

4. *Nec mediocriter haesitaui, sitne aliquod discrimen aetatum, an quamlibet
   teneri nihil a robustioribus differant;*

- *haesitaui* from *haesito, haesitare* is 1st singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to hesitate.
- *sit* from *sum, esse, fui, futurus* is 3rd singular present active
  subjunctive. This is given in the form *sitne*, which according to Lewis and
  Short, when you combine *-ne* with a subjunctive it turns into the question of
  'whether'. This is subjunctive because it's a indirect question.
- *differant* from *differo, differre, distuli, dilatus* is 3rd plural present
  active subjunctive, meaning to differ. This is subjunctive because it's
  a indirect question.

    Nor did I insignificantly hesitate, whether there is some difference of
    ages, or they, however tender, differ none from mature people;

5. *detur paenitentiae uenia, an ei, qui omnino Christianus fuit, desisse non
   prosit;*

- *detur* from *do, dare, dedi, datus* is 3rd singular present passive
  subjunctive, meaning to give.
- *fuit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative.
- *desisse* from *desino, desinere, desivi, desitus* is the perfect active
  infinitive, meaning to desist.
- *prosit* from *prosum, prodesse, profui, profuturus* is 3rd singular present
  active subjunctive, meaning to be useful/advantageous or to benefit/profit.
  This takes the dative. 

    Whether kindness be given for regret, or whether it not benefit him,
    who has been entirely christian, to have desisted.

6. *nomen ipsum, si flagitiis careat, an flagitia cohaerentia nomini
   puniantur.*

- *careat* from *careo, carere, carui, caritus* is 3rd singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to be without. Subjunctive because it's in the prodasis
  of a future less vivid.
- *cohaerentia* from *cohaereo, cohaerere, cohaesi, cohaesus* is the present
  active participle, meaning to cling together.
- *puniantur* from *punio, punire, punivi, punitus* is 3rd plural present
  passive subjunctive, meaning to punish. This is the protasis of the future
  less vivid conditional.

    Whether the name itself be punished, if it should be without shames, or the
    shameful acts clinging to the name are punished.

7. *Interim, \<in\> iis qui ad me tamquam Christiani deferebantur, hunc sum
   secutus modum.*

- *in* can be translated as 'in accordance with/regard to/the case of' given the
  ablative case.
- *deferebantur* from *defero, deferre, detuli, delatus* is 3rd plural imperfect
  passive indicative, meaning to report.
- *sum secutus* from *sequor, sequi, secutus sum* is 1st singular perfect
  indicative, meaning to follow.

    Meanwhile, in regard to those who were reported to me as Christians,
    I followed this method.

8. *Interrogaui ipsos an essent Christiani.* 

- *interrogaui* from *interrogo, interrogare* is 1st singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to ask/interrogate.
- *essent* is 3rd plural imperfect active subjunctive. This is subjunctive
  because this is an indirect question.
- *christiani* is a predicate nominative.

    I interrogated themselves whether they were Christians

9. *Confitentes iterum ac tertio interrogaui supplicium minatus: perseuerantes
   duci iussi.*

- *confitentes* from *confiteor, confiteri, confessus sum* is the present
  participle, meaning to admit. This is acting as a substantative.
- *iterum* and *tertio* are adverbs.
- *interrogaui* from *interrogo, interrogare* is 1st singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to ask/interrogate.
- *minatus* from *minor, minari, minatus sum* is the perfect participle, meaning
  to threaten. This is modifying the implied subject of *terrogaui* and fits
  with *supplicium*.
- *perseuerantes* from *persevero, persevrare* is the present active participle,
  meaning to persist.
- *duci* from *duco, ducere, duxi, ductus* is the present passive infitive,
  meaning to lead.
- *iussi* from *iubeo, iubere, iussi, iussus* is 1st singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to order.

    I having threatened punishment asked those confessing again and thrice;
    I ordered those persisting to be led (away).

10. *Neque enim dubitabam, qualecumque esset quod faterentur, pertinaciam certe
    et inflexibilem obstinationem debere puniri.*

- *dubitabam* from *dubito, dubitare* is 1st singular imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to doubt.
- *esset* is 3rd singular imperfect active subjunctive. This is subjunctive
  because it's inside indirect speech.
- *faterentur* from *fateor, fateri, fassus sum* is 3rd plural imperfect
  subjunctive, meaning to admit/confess (w/ACC) or praise (w/DAT). This is
  subjunctive because it's inside indirect speech.
- *debere* from *debeo, debere, debui, debitus* is the present active infinitve,
  meaning to owe. This sets off indirect speech with head verb *dubitabam*.
- *puniri* from *punio, punire, punivi, punitus* is the present infinitive,
  meaning to punish.

    For nor was I doubting, whatsoever it was which they confessed, that
    their persistance and inflexible stubborness certainly ought to be punished.

11. *Fuerunt alii similis amentiae, quos, quia ciues Romani erant, adnotaui in
    urbem remittendos.*

- *fuerunt* is 3rd plural perfect active indicative.
- *similis amentiae* is a genitive of description.
- *erant* is 3rd plural imperfect active indicative.
- *adnotaui* from *adnoto, adnotare* is 1st singular perfect active indicative,
  meaning to now/jot down or to notice.
- *remittendos* from *remitto, remittere, remisi, remissus* is the future
  passive participle, meaning to send back. This is the gerundive.

    Some people have been of similar madness, whom, because they were Roman
    citizens, I designated them as ought to be returned into the city.

12. *Mox ipso tractatu, ut fieri solet, diffundente se crimine plures species
    inciderunt.* 

- *moxipso* is kill, I think instead it's *mox ipso*.
- *fieri* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is the present passive infinitive,
  meaning to do.
- *solet* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to become accustomed to.
- *diffundente* from *diffundo, diffundere, diffundi, diffusus* is the present
  active participle, meaning to diffuse.
- *inciderunt* from *incido, incidere, incidi, incasus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to happen.

    Soon because of the very handling, as it is accustomed to be done,
    with the crime spreading itself more appearances happened.

13. *Propositus est libellus sine auctore multorum nomina continens.* 

- *propositus est* from *propono, proponere, proposui, propositus* is 3rd
  singular perfect passive indicative, meaning to display.
- *continens* from *contineo, continere, continui, contentus* is the present
  active participle, meaning to maintain.

    A small book without an author had been displayed maintaining the names of
    many.

14. *Qui negabant esse se Christianos aut fuisse, cum praeeunte me deos
    adpellarent et imagini tuae, quam propter hoc iusseram cum simulacris
    numinum adferri, ture ac uino supplicarent, praeterea male dicerent Christo,
    quorum nihil cogi posse dicuntur qui sunt re uera Christiani, dimittendos
    putaui.*

- *negabant* from *nego, negare, negavi, negatus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to deny. 
- *esse* is the present active infinitive.
- *fuisse* is the perfect active infinitive.
- *esse* and *fuisse* set off indirect speech, note the temporality is in the
  past because the main verb is *negabant*, i.e. imperfect.
- *praeeunte* from *praeeo, praeire, praeivi, praeitus* is the present active
  participle, meaning to go before/precede.
- *adpellarent* from *adpello, adpellare, adpellavi, adpellatus* is 3rd plural
  imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to appeal. This is subjunctive because
  it's inside of a circumstantial *cum* clause.
- *iusseram* from *iubeo, iubere, iussi, iussus* is 1st singular pluperfect
  active indicative, meaning to order. This takes as complimentary infinitive
  *adferri*.
- *adferri* from *adfero, adferre, adtuli, adlatus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to bring to or to carry.
- *supplicarent* from *supplico, supplicare, supplicavi, supplicatus* is 3rd
  plural imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to pray. This is subjunctive
  because it's inside of a circumstantial *cum* clause. This takes the dative.
- *dicerent* from *dico, ddicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  subjunctive. This is subjunctive because it's inside of a circumstantial *cum*
  clause. The person being addressed is usually in the dative.
- *cogi* from *cogo, cogere, coegi, coactus* is the present passive infitive,
  meaning to compel.
- *posse* from *possum, posse, potui* is the present active infinitive, meaning
  to be able.
- *dicuntur* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd plural present passive
  indicative, meaning to say.
- *dimittendos* from *dimitto, dimittere, dimisi, dimissus* is the future
  passive participle, meaning to send away/off. After supplying the *esse* we
  have a passive periphrastic.
- *putavi* from *puto, putare* is 1st singular perfect active indicative,
  meaning to think. *esse* is supplied implicitly here to open indirect speech.

    Those who were denying that they were, or had been, Christians themselves,
    since, with me dictating, they were appealing to the gods and they were
    praying to your image with incense and wine, which I had ordered to be
    brought on account of this along with images of the gods, besides speaking
    badly of Christ, nothing of which they are said to be able to be compelled
    who are by true fact Christians, I thought that they ought to be sent away. 

15. *Alii ab indice nominati esse se Christianos dixerunt et mox negauerunt;
    fuisse quidem sed desisse, quidam ante triennium, quidam ante plures annos,
    non nemo etiam ante uiginti.*

- *nominati* from *nomino, nominare* is the perfect passive participle, meaning
  to name.
- *esse* is the present active infinitive. This is setting off indirect speech
  with head verb *dixerunt*.
- *dixerunt* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to say.
- *negauerunt* from *nego, negare* is 3rd plural perfect active indicative,
  meaning to deny.
- *fuisse* is the perfect active infinitive. This is setting off indirect speech
  with head verb *dixerunt*.
- *desisse* is the perfect active infinitive, meaning to stop/end/finish.

    Others having been named by the book said that they were Christians
    and soon denied it; that they had indeed been it but had desisted, someone
    before three years, someone before many more years, and also not no one
    before twenty.

16. *\<Hi\> quoque omnes et imaginem tuam deorumque simulacra uenerati sunt et
    Christo male dixerunt.*

- *uenerati sunt* from *veneror, venerari, veneratus sum* is 3rd plural perfect
  indicative, meaning to adore/revere.
- *dixerunt* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to talk/speak. The person being addressed is usually in
  the dative.

    All these people also revered both your image and the statues of the gods and
    spoke ill to Christ.

17. *Adfirmabant autem hanc fuisse summam uel culpae suae uel erroris, quod
    essent soliti stato die ante lucem conuenire, carmenque Christo quasi deo
    dicere secum inuicem seque sacramento non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed
    ne furta ne latrocinia ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne
    depositum adpellati abnegarent.*

- *adfirmabant* from *adfirmo, adfirmare* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to affirm.
- *fuisse* is the perfect active infinitive. Sets off indirect speech with
  *hanc*.
- *essent soliti* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is 3rd plural pluperfect
  passive subjunctive, meaning to be accustomed to. This is subjunctive because
  it's a relative inside of indirect speech. 
- *conuenire*, *dicere*, and *obstringere* are taken by *essent soliti* and are
  present active infinitive, meaning to assemble, to sing, and to bind
  respectively.
- *committterent* from *commito, committere* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to commit. This is subjuncttive because it's an indirect
  command.
- *fallerent* from *fallo, fallere, fefelli, falsus* is 3rd plural imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to deceive.
- *adpellati* from *adpello, adpellare* is the perfect passive participle,
  meaning to call (upon).
- *abnegarent* from *abnego, abnegare, abnegavi, abnegatus* is 3rd plural
  imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to deny.

    They were afffirming however that this had been the highest of either their
    own blame or error, which they had become accustomed to assemble before
    light on a having been fixed day, and to sing a song mutually with
    themselves to Crist as if to a god and to bind themselves by means of
    a solemn oath, not in some crime, but to not commit theft, robbrey, or
    adultry, to not deceive loyalty, to, having been called upon, not deny
    a deposit.

18. *Quibus peractis morem sibi discedendi fuisse rursusque coeundi ad capiendum
    cibum, promiscuum tamen et innoxium; quod ipsum facere desisse post edictum
    meum, quo secundum mandata tua hetaerias esse uetueram.*

- *quibus* is a connective relative.
- *peractis* from *perago, peragere* is the perfect passive participle, meaning
  to disturb.
- *fuisse* is the perfect infinitive. This is the historical infinitive. Or
  there is some hijinks going on, and I don't like it.
- *discendi* from *discedo, discere, didici, discitus* is the genitive gerund,
  meaning to depart.
- *coeundi* from *coeo, coire* is the genitive gerund, meaning to come together.
- *capiendum* from *capio, capere, cepi, captus* is the gerundive modifying
  *cibum*, meaning to seize.
- *facere* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* si the present active infinitive.
- *desisse* from *desino, desinere, desivi, desitus* (it's syncopated) is the
  perfect active infinitive. This is a historical infinitive.
- not sure what kind of ablative is *quo*.
- *uetueram* from *veto, vetare* is 1st singular pluperfect active indicative,
  meaning to forbit.
    
    With those things having been done it had been the custom of departing and
    returning again for the seizing of food, nevertheless common and harmless;
    which itself they stopped to do after my proclaimation, by which, according
    to your orders, I had forbidden there to be brotherhoods.

19. *Quo magis necessarium credidi ex duabus ancillis, quae ministrae dicebantur,
    quid esset ueri, et per tormenta quaerere.*

- *quo* is another connective relative.
- *credidi* from *credo, credere, credidi, creditus* is 1st singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to trust.
- *dicebantur* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd plural imperfect passive
  indicative, meaning to say.
- *esset* is 3rd singular imperfect active subjunctive.
- *ueri* is a partitive genitive.
- *quaerere* from *quaero, quaerere, quaesivi, quaesitus* is the present active
  infintive, meaning to seek.

    All the more by these things I believed that it was more necessary to seek
    even through torture what of truth it was from the two slave girls, who were
    called attendants.

20. *Nihil aliud inueni quam superstitionem prauam et immodicam.*

- *inueni* from *invenio, invenire, inveni, inventus* is 1st singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to discover.

    I discovered nothing other than a crooked and excessive superstition.

21. *Ideo dilata cognitione ad consulendum te decucurri.*

- *dilata cognitione* is an ablative absolute.
- *dilata* from *differo, differre, distuli, dilatus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to stop.
- *consulendum* from *consulo, consulere, consului, consultus* is the gerundive,
  meaning to consult.
- *decucurri* from *decurro, decurrere, decucurri, decursus* is 1st singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to hurry.

    Therefore with the examination having been deferred I hastened for
    consulting you.

22. *Visa est enim mihi res digna consultatione, maxime propter periclitantium
    numerum.* 

- *visa est* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd singular perfect passive
  indicative, meaning to see.
- *periclitantium* from *periclitor, periclitari, periclitatus sum* is the
  present participle, meaning to try.

    For this affiar seemed to me worthy of consulatation, especially because of the
    number of those endangered.

23. *Multi enim omnis aetatis, omnis ordinis, utriusque sexus etiam uocantur in
    periculum et uocabuntur.*

- *uocantur* from *voco, vocare* is 3rd plural present passive indicative,
  meaning to call.
- *uocabuntur* from above is 3rd plural future passive indicative.

    For many people of every age, of every rank, and even of either sex are
    called into danger and [many people] shall be called.

24. *Neque ciuitates tantum, sed uicos etiam atque agros superstitionis istius
    contagio peruagata est; quae uidetur sisti et corrigi posse.*

- *peruagata est* from *pervagor, pervagari, pervagatus sum* is 3rd singular
  perfect indicative, meaning to wander or range through.
- *uidetur* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd singular present passive
  indicative.
- *sisti* from *sisto, sistere, stiti, status* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to stop.
- *corrigi* from *corrigo, corrigere, correxi, correctus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to correct.
- *posse* from *possum, posse, potui* is the present active infinitive, meaning
  to be able.

    Neither only the cities, but also the villages and fields the influence of
    that superstition pervaded; which seems that it is able to be stopped and
    be corrected.

25. *Certe satis constat prope iam desolata templa coepisse celebrari, et sacra
    sollemnia diu intermissa repeti passimque uenire \<carnem\> uictimarum,
    cuius adhuc rarissimus emptor inueniebatur.*

- *constat* from *consto, constare, constiti, constatus* is 3rd singular present
  active indicative, meaning it is agreed.
- *desolata* from *desolo, desolare* is the perfect passive participle, meaning
  to forsake. This modifies *templa*.
- *coepisse* from *coepio, coepere, coepi, coeptus* is the perfect active
  infinitive, meaning to begin. This sets off indirect speech with head verb
  *constat*.
- *celebrari* from *celebro, celebrare* is the present passive infinitive,
  meaning to crowd. Taken by *coepisse*.
- *intermissa* from *intermitto, intermittere* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to interrupt.
- *repeti* from *repeto, repetere, repretivi, repetitus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to return to.
- *uenire* from *venio, venire, veni, ventus* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to come.
- *rarissimus* is the superlative of *rarus*.
- *inueniebatur* from *invenio, invenire* is 3rd singular imperfect passive
  indicative, meaning to find. This is in a relative clause.

    Certainly it is sufficiently agreed that now the nearly forsaken temples
    begin to be crowded, and the sacred practices having been interrupted for
    a long time are sought out again and the flesh of sacrifices is sold here
    and there, of which the most rare buyer was found.

26. *Ex quo facile est opinari, quae turba hominum emendari possit, si sit
    paenitentiae locus.*

- *esse* is the present active infinitive.
- *opinari* from *opinor, opinari, opinatus sum* is the present infinitive,
  meaning to suppose.
- *quae* is the interrogative pronoun.
- *emendari* from *emendo, emendare* is the present passive infinitive, meaning
  to correct.
- *possit* from *possum, posse, potui* is 3rd singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to be able. This is subjunctive because it is an indirect
  question.
- *sit* is 3rd singular present active subjunctive. THis is subjunctive because
  it's by attraction.

    From which it is easy to imagine, which a crowd of men can be corrected, if
    there is a location for penance.
