# (XCVII) TRAIANUS PLINIO S.

*Tajan's answer.*

1. *Actum[^1] quem debuisti, mi Secunde, in excutiendis causis[^2] eorum, qui
   Christiani ad te delati fuerant, secutus es.* 

- *debuisti* from *debeo, debere, debui, debitus* is 2nd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to owe.
- *excutiendis* from *excutio, excutere, excussi, excusssus* is the gerundive
  modifying *causis*, meaning to shake out or off/cast out/search.
- *delati* from *defero, deferre, detuli, delatus* is the perfect passive
  participle modifying *Christiani*, meaning to report.
- *fuerant* is 3rd plural pluperfect active indicative.
- *secutus es* from *sequor, sequi, secutus sum* is 2nd singular perfect
  indicative, meaning to follow.

    The course which you ought to have done, my 2nd, in examining the cases of
    those men, who had been Christians reported to you, you have followed.

[^1]: **actum:** course, procedure, method.
[^2]: **in excutiedis causis:** in investigating the cases.

2. *Neque enim in uniuersum aliquid, quod quasi certam formam habeat, constitui
   potest.*

- *in uniuersum* is an adverb meaning 'in general'.
- *habeat* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 3rd singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to have. This is a relative clause of characteristic,
  modifying the indefinite pronoun *aliquid*. **I don't know how to handle the
  quasi.**
- *constitui* from *constituo, constituere, constitui, constitutus* is the
  present passive infinitive, meaning to erect. Complimentary infinitive of
  *potest*.
- *potest* from *possum, posse, potui* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to be able.

    For neither is anything, of the sort as if it has a fixed form, able to be
    established in general.

3. *Conquirendi non sunt[^3];*

- *conquirendi sunt* from *conquiro, conquirere, conquisivi, conquisitus* is the
  passive periphrastic, meaning to seek out.

    They ought not be sought out;

[^3]: **Conquirendi non sunt:** Pliny was not to seek out Christians in order to
  bring them to punishment; but if they were duly and formally accused before
  him, he was not at liberty to overlook their violation of the law.

4. *si deferantur et arguantur, puniendi[^4] sunt, ita tamen ut, qui negauerit
   se Christianum esse idque re ipsa manifestum fecerit, id est supplicando dis
   nostris, quamuis suspectus in praeteritum, ueniam ex paenitentia
   impetret[^5].*

- *deferantur* from *defero, deferre, detuli, delatus* and *arguantur* from
  *arguo, arguere, argui, argutus* are 3rd plural present passive subjunctive,
  meaning to report and to prove, respectively. These are in the protasis of
  a future less vivid conditional.
- *puniendi sunt* from *punior, puniri, punitus sum* is the passive
  periphrastic, meaning to punish.
- *negauerit* from *nego, negare* is 3rd singular future perfect active
  indicative, meaning to deny. Relative clause of characteristic.
- *esse* sets of indirect speech under head verb *negauerit*.
- *fecerit* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to do.
- *supplicando* from *supplico, supplicare* is the gerund, meaning to
  supplicate. This takes the dative, which here is *dis*.
- *impetret* from *impetro, impetrare* is 3rd singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to obtain. This is subjunctive because it's a result
  clause set off by *ita ut*.

    If they should be reported and are made known, they must be punished,
    nevertheless so that he, of the sort who denied that he is Christian and
    made it obvious by the matter itself, that is, by supplicating to our gods,
    although suspected in(to) the past, obtains favor out of penance.

[^4]: **pudiendi:** i.e., for the nomen ipsum, -- by the sword.
[^5]: **ueniam...impetret:** this answers the question in the last letter,
  *detur paenitentiae venia*, etc, page 125, lines 10 sqq.

5. *Sine auctore uero propositi libelli[^6] in nullo crimine locum habere debent.* 

- *propositi* from *propono, proponere, proposui, propositus* is the perfect
  passive participle, meaning to display.
- *debent* from *debeo, debere, debui, debitus* is 3rd plural present active
  indicative, meaning to owe. This takes *habere* as a complimentary infinitive.

    However accusations having been displayed without an author ought to have
    a place in no indictment.

[^6]: **libelli:** accusations, informations.

6. *Nam et pessimi exempli nec nostri saeculi[^7] est.*

- *pessimi* is a superlative adjective.


    For it is both of the worst example and not of our age.

[^7]: **pessimi...saeculi:** very bad as a precedent, and not in accordance with
  the spirit of our age.
