# Section 13

1. *In omni Gallia eorum hominum qui aliquo sunt numero atque honore genera sunt
   duo. Nam plebes paene servorum habetur loco, quae nihil audet per se, nullo
   adhibetur consilio.*

   In all of Gaul there are two classes of these men who are of a certain number
   and honour.  For the common people are being held almost in the position of
   slaves, who dares nothing by themselves, none are being admitted to
   deliberation.

2. *Plerique, cum aut aere alieno aut magnitudine tributorum aut iniuria
   potentiorum premuntur, sese in servitutem dicant nobilibus: quibus in hos
   eadem omnia sunt iura, quae dominis in servos.*

   The majority of them are either being overwhelmed by debt or by the size of
   tributes or by the wrongs done by more powerful folk, they offer themselves
   in slavery to the nobles: who have all the same rights over them as masters
   have over their slaves.

3. *Sed de his duobus generibus alterum est Druidum, alterum equitum.*

   But of these two kinds one is of Druids, the other knights.

4. *Illi rebus divinis intersunt, sacrificia publica ac privata procurant,
   religiones interpretantur: ad hos magnus adulescentium numerus disciplinae
   causa concurrit, magnoque hi sunt apud eos honore.*

   The former take part in divine worship, they take care of public and private
   sacrifices, they explain questions of ritual: A great number of youth
   assemble to these men for the sake of instruction, and the Druids are held in
   great honour by them.  and the Druids are held in great honor in the opinion
   of them.

5. *Nam fere de omnibus controversiis publicis privatisque constituunt et, si
   quod est admissum facinus, si caedes facta, si de hereditate, de finibus
   controversia est, idem decernunt, praemia poenasque constituunt;*

   For they decide about almost all public and private disputes, and if any
   crime has been committed, if any slaughter has been committed, if there is
   dispute about inheritance or boundaries of property, the same men settle it,
   they decide rewards and penalties.

6. *si qui aut privatus aut populus eorum decreto non stetit, sacrificiis
   interdicunt. Haec poena apud eos est gravissima.*

   If any individual or community does not abide by their decision, they exclude
   them from sacrifices. This penality is very heavy among them.

7. Quibus ita est interdictum, hi numero impiorum ac sceleratorum habentur, his
   omnes decedunt, aditum sermonemque defugiunt, ne quid ex contagione incommodi
   accipiant, neque his petentibus ius redditur, neque honos ullus communicatur. 

   For those for whom there has been an interdiction , are held in the number of
   impious men and criminals, everyone keeps out of their way, they avoid their
   approach and conversation, so that that may recieve nothing of misfortune
   from the contact and neither is justice returned to them when they are
   seeking it, nor distinction given to any man.

8. His autem omnibus Druidibus praeest unus, qui summam inter eos habet
   avuctoritatem.

   But, with all these druids one is in command, who has the highest authority
   among them.

9. Hoc mortuo, aut si qui ex reliquis excellit dignitate succedit, aut, si sunt
   plures pares, suffragio Druidum, non numquam etiam armis de principatu
   contendunt.

   On his death, either if anyone with dignity is eminent out of the rest he
   succeeds, or, if there is several of equal standing, by a vote of the druids,
   sometimes they also compete about supreme command by means of weapons.

10. Hi certo anni tempore in finibus Carnutum, quae regio totius Galliae media
    habetur, considunt in loco consecrato. Huc omnes undique qui controversias
    habent conveniunt eorumque decretis iudiciisque parent.

    These druids at a certain time of the year in the boundaries of Carnutus,
    whose territory is held in the middle of all Gaul, they hold a meeting in
    the consecrated place. Hither from all of places all who have disputes
    convene and and they obey the decrees and judgements of them. 

11. Disciplina in Britannia reperta atque inde in Galliam translata esse
    existimatur, et nunc qui diligentius eam rem cognoscere volunt plerumque
    illo discendi causa proficiscuntur.

    (That) Discipline is thought to have been found existing in Britain and
    transferred from there into Gaul, and now he who wishes to carefully learn
    that subject generally set out to Britain to study it.
