# Section 14

1. Druides a bello abesse consuerunt, neque tributa una cum reliquis pendunt;
   militiae vacationem omniumque rerum habent immunitatem.

   The druids are accustomed to take no part in war, nor do they pay tribute
   together with the others; They have the exemption from military service and
   have exemption of all things of military service.

2. Tantis excitati praemiis et sua sponte multi in disciplinam conveniunt et
   parentibus propinquisque mittuntur. Magnum ibi numerum versuum ediscere
   dicuntur.

   Having been incited by the great rewards many of their own will both assemble
   to be given this training and are being sent by parents and kinsman. There
   they are being said to learn by heart a great number of verses.

3. Itaque annos non nulli xx in disciplina permanent. Neque fas esse existimant
   ea litteris mandare, cum in reliquis fere rebus, publicis privatisque
   rationibus, Graecis litteris utantur.

   And so for 20 years some remain in training. And they do not think that it is
   right to commit those things to writing, although in nearly all other things,
   such as the records for public and private things, they use Greek characters.

4. Id mihi duabus de causis instituisse videntur, quod neque in vulgum
   disciplinam efferri velint neque eos qui discunt litteris confisos minus
   memoriae studere; quod fere plerisque accidit ut praesidio littaerarum
   diligentiam in perdiscendo ac memoriam remittant.

   It seems to me that they had adopted this concerning two causes, for the
   purpose of wishing the training to neither be spread commonly about nor do
   they want those who learn having relied on writing and pay too little
   attention to cultivating their memory; For it generally happens to most
   people that by the assisstance of writing they relax their diligence in
   learning by heart and memory.
