# Section 17

1. Deum maxime Mercurium colunt. Huius sunt plurima simulacra, hunc omnium
   inventorem artium ferunt, hunc viarum atque itinerum ducem, hunc ad quaestus
   pecuniae mercaturasque habere vim maximam arbitrantur.

   Post hunc Apollinem et Martem et Iovem et Minervam. 2 De his eandem fere,
   quam reliquae gentes, habent opinionem: Apollinem morbos depellere, Minervam
   operum atque artificiorum initia tradere, Iovem imperium caelestium tenere,
   Martem bella regere.  4 Multis in civitatibus harum rerum exstructos tumulos
   locis consecratis conspicari licet; 5 neque saepe accidit, ut neglecta
   quispiam religione aut capta apud se occultare aut posita tollere auderet,
   gravissimumque ei rei supplicium cum cruciatu constitutum est.

   They worship the God Mercury the most There are more images of him: They bear
   him the inventor of all arts, The leader of their journeys and roads, and the
   one to have the greatest strength for the profit of money and trade

   After this they value Apollo and Mars and Jupiter and Minerva.

   About these gods they have the same opinion as the remaining nations:
   That Apollo drives away sickness
   and that Minerva hands over the beginnings of work and trade
   That Jupiter holds the authority of the Heavens 
   That Mars controls war

3. Huic, cum proelio dimicare constituerunt, ea quae bello ceperint plerumque
   devovent: quae superaverunt, animalia capta immolant reliquasque res in unum
   locum conferunt.

   When they decided to fight in battle: they generally devote these things,
   which they will seize in war to him.
   Which have remained: They sacrificed the captured animals They collect these
   remaining things in one place.

   In many communities one might observe mounds of these things that have been
   constructed in sacred places

   Nor does it often happen that anyone with religious neglected dares to hide 

   never does it often happen, with any religion disregarded, dares either to
   hide things captured among his house or take deposited things

   the most serious punishment for this thing with torture has been set up.


