# Section 18

1. *Galli se omnes ab Dite patre prognatos praedicant, idque ab Druidibus
   proditum dicunt.*

   All Gauls assert that they are descended from Dis, the father, and they say
   that it has been recorded by the druids.

   This is two pieces of indirect speech, where *esse* has been inserted into
   both parts of the sentence. The *esse* turns *proditum* into *proditum esse*,
   a perfect passive infinitive, whereas in the first part, it stands by itself
   as a present active infinive.

2. *Ob eam causam spatia omnis temporis non numero dierum sed noctium finiunt;
   dies natales et mensum et annorum initia sic observant ut noctem dies
   subsequatur.*

   On account of this reason they do not rekon all periods of time by the number
   of days but of nights; They thus observe birthdays and the beginnings of
   months and years so that the day may follow closely the night.

   "All periods of time" is from a note, as opposed to all spaces of time.
   Purpose clause with present subjunctive.

3. *In religquis vitae institutis hoc fere ab reliquis differunt quod suos
   liberos, nisi cum adoleverunt ut munus militiae sustinere possint, palam ad
   se adire non patiuntur filiumque puerili aetate in publico in conspectu
   patris adsistere turpe ducunt.*

   In the other customs of life they generally differ from the rest with respect
   to this thing 
   because they do not openly allow their own children to approach them, 
   except when they have grown up so that they may be able to withstand the duty
   of military service, 
   and they consider that it is a shameful thing that the son with a childish
   age shows himself in public in the presence of the father.

   Stinky shitty translation, two indirect statements where the esse in drops
   out in the first?
