# Section 19

1. *Viri quantas pecunias ab uxoribus dotis nomine acceperunt tantas ex suis
   bonis aestimatione facta cum dotibus communicant.*

   The men with an estimation having been made with they dowries they share so
   much from their own goods as how much money they recieved from the wives in
   the name of a dowry.

   *dotis nomine* = "in the name of dowry" ablative of specification.

2. *Huius omnis pecuniae coniunctim ratio habetur fructusque servantur: uter
   eorum vita superarit, ad eum pars utriusque cum fructibus superiorum temporum
   pervenit.*

   An account of all this money is jointly held and and the income is protected.
   whichever of them will have survived in life, to him comes the part of both
   and with the income of former time.

   To ask, what is the que in *utriusque* doing, why is the and necessary.

3. *Viri in uxores, sicuti in liberos, vitae necisque habent potestatem; et cum
   pater familiae inlustriore loco natus decessit, eius propinqui conveniunt et,
   de morte si res in suspicionem venit, de uxoribus in servilem modum
   quaestionem habent et, si compertum est, igni atque omnibus tormentis
   excruciatas interficiunt.*

   The men held the power of life or death over their wives, just as over their
   children.; and when the father of the family, born of a more honorable
   place, died, the relatives of his assemble and, if the thing came into
   suspicion regarding the death, they hold a questioning of the wives in a
   servile manner and, if it is discovered, they kill and torture them with fire
   and all tortures.

   "born of a more honorable place": notes say that this is ablative of origin.
   Note also said to treat *excruciatas interficunt* as *eas excruciant et
   interficiunt*.

4. *Funera sunt pro cultu Gallorum magnifica et sumptuosa; omniaque quae vivis
   cordi fuisse arbitrantur in ignem inferunt, etiam animalia;*

   The funerals are splendid and expensive considering the civilization of the
   Gauls; and all which is judged to have been near their heart when alive they
   carry into the fire, even animals;

5. *ac paulo supra hanc memoriam servi et clientes quos ab eis dilectos esse
   constabat iustis funeribus confectis una cremabantur.*

   and a little before this time the servants and vassals whom is was agreed
   were beloved by him were burned with him with the just funeral having been
   completed.
