# Section 21

1. *Germani multum ab hac consuetudine differunt. Nam neque Druides habent qui
   rebus divinis praesint neque sacrificiis student.*

   The Germans greatly differ from this custom. For neither do they have druids
   to be in command of the divine things nor do they pay attendtion to
   sacrifices.

   Praesum takes the dative which is why *rebus divinis* is dative.

2. *Deorum numero eos solos ducunt quos cernunt et quorum aperte opibus
   iuvantur, Solem et Vulcanum et Lunam; reliquous ne fama quidem acceperunt.*

   They consider only those in the number of gods whom they see and of who they
   are openly helped by means of power, the Sun, Vulcan, and Moon. They have not
   heard of the others even by means of rumor.

3. *Vita omnis in venationibus atque in studiis rei militaris consistit: ab
   parvulis labori ac duritiae student.*

   His whole life consists with hunting and with military pursuits: from
   childhood pay attention to labour and hardiness.

4. *Qui diutissime impuberes permanserunt, maximam inter suos ferunt laudem: hoc
   alii staturam, alii vires nervosque confirmari putant.*

   They who have remained unmarried for the longest time obtain the maximum
   praise amongst themselves: by this some think that height is strengthened,
   and others think that muscle power is strengthened.

5. *Intra annum vero vicesimum feminae notitiam habuisse in turpissimis habent
   rebus; cuius rei nulla est occultatio, quod et promiscue in fluminibus
   perluuntur et pellibus aut parvis renonum tegimentis utuntur magna corporis
   parte nuda.*

   They indeed hold it in the most shameful things to have held knowledge of a
   woman before the twentieth year; of this thing there is no concealment,
   because are washed together in the rivers and they use hide or small
   coverings of reindeer skin with a great part of the body bare.
