# Section 23

1. *Civitatibus maxima laus est quam latissime circum se vastatis finibus
   solitudines habere.*

   The maximum glory for the states is to have wilderness as wide as possible
   about themselves with the frontiers having been laid waste.

   *quam latissime* = "over as wide an area as possible" is by the notes.
   *vastatis finibus* is treated as vanilla ablative of absolute.

2. *Hoc proprium virtutis existimant, expulsos agris finitimos cedere neque
   quemquam prope audere consistere;*

   They think that this is the characteristic mark of virtue, that their
   neighbors retreat having been expelled from their territory, and that no one
   dares to stand close by.

   *Hoc...existimant* is translated as indirect speech, actually they're all
   indirect speech.

3. *simul hoc se fore tutiores arbitrantur, repentinae incursionis timore
   sublato.*

   at the same time they judge that they will be more safe because of this, when
   the fear of sudden invasion has been raised.

   *repentinae...sublato* one big temporal ablative absolute, the first half is
   indirect speech.

4. Cum bellum civitas aut inlatum defendit aut infert, magistratus qui ei bello
   praesint, ut vitae necisque habent potestatem, deliguntur.

   When a state either repels having been made war or makes war, the
   magistrates are chosen to take command of that war, so that they may hold the
   power of life and death.

5. In pace nullus est communis magistratus, sed principes regionum atque pagorum
   inter suos ius dicunt controversiasque minuunt.

   In peace there is no common magistracy, but the leaders of the regions and
   districts administer justice and and settle disputes amongst their own men.

   *ius dicunt* = "administer justice" comes from the notes.

6. Latrocinia nullam habent infamiam quae extra fines cuiusque civitatis fiunt,
   atque ea iuventutis exercendae ac desidiae minuendae causa fieri praedicant.

   Raiding expeditions which happen outside the territories of each state are
   have no infamy, and they assert that these happen for the sake of exercising
   the youth and diminishing idleness.

7. Atque ubi quis ex principibus in concilio dixit se ducem fore, qui sequi
   velint profiteantur, consurgunt ei qui et causam et hominem probant suumque
   auxilium pollicentur atque ab multitudine collaudantur:

   and when any out of the leaders said in the council that he will be their
   leader, and that to let those who wish to follow him volunteer, they rise up
   for him and the cause and they approve of the man and of the aid of his men
   ???

8. Qui ex his secuti non sunt, in desertorum ac proditorum numero ducuntur
   omniumque his rerum postea fides derogatur. 

9. Hospitem violare fas non putant; qui quaque de causa ad eos venerunt ab
   iniuria prohibent, sanctos habent, hisque omnium domus patent victusque
   communicatur.
