# Part 18

1. *De C. Petronio pauca supra repetenda sunt.*

- *supra* here is the adverbial usage in time, i.e. before, previously,
  formerly. "When pertaining to time it especially refers to any thing
  previously said or written."
- *repetenda sunt* from *repeto, repetere, repetivi, repetitus* is the passive
  periphrastic (should/ought/had to), meaning to return to.

    A few things must be returned to previously concerning C. Petronius.

2. *Nam illi dies per somnum, nox officiis et oblectamentis vitae
   transigebatur;*

- *illi* is just a dative of reference.
- *officiis et oblectamentis* is an ablative of means.
- *transigebatur* from *transigo, transigere, transegi, transactus* is 3rd
  singular imperfect passive indicative, meaning to finish.

    For that man was finishing the days through sleep, the night with the duties
    and the delights of life.

3. *utque alios industria, ita hunc ignavia ad famam protulerat, habebaturque
   non ganeo et profligator, ut plerique sua haurientium, sed erudito luxu.*

- *protulerat* from *profero, proferre, protuli, prolatus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active indicative, meaning to bring forward or to advance.
- *habebaturque* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  passive indicative, meaning to have.
- **What is the *sua* doing??**
- *haurientium* from *haurio, haurire, hausi, haustus* is the present active
  participle, meaning to exhaust.
- *erudito luxu* is an ablative of quality.

    and as dilligence had advanced others, thus laziness had advanced this man
    to fame, and he was not considered a glutton or spendthrift, as the majority
    of drained men, but a man of educated luxury.

4. *ac dicta factaque eius quanto solutiora et quandam sui neglegentiam
   praeferentia, tanto gratius in speciem simplicitatis accipiebantur.*

- *praeferentia* from *praefero, praeferre, praetuli, praelatus* is the present
  active participle, meaning to display.
- *tanto (+comp.) ... quanto (+comp.)* $\implies$ the --er... the --er.
- *accipiebantur* from *accipio, accipere, accepi, acceptus* is 3rd plural
  imperfect passive indicative, meaning to accept.

    and his words and deeds, the freer and the more displaying certain
    negligence of his, the more agreeably they were being accepted for the
    appearance of simplicity.

5. *proconsul tamen Bithyniae et mox consul vigentem se ac parem negotiis
   ostendit.*

- *parem* takes the thing with which the comparison is made most frequently in
  the dative, i.e. *negotiis*.
- *ostendit* from *ostendo, ostendere, ostendi, ostensus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to show. Verbs of showing often taking
  a predicative accusative alowing with along with the direct object.

    nevertheless the proconsul of Bithnyia and soon the consul he showed himself
    as a vigorous man and equal to business.

6. *dein revolutus ad vitia seu vitiorum imitatione inter paucos familiarium
   Neroni adsumptus est, elegantiae arbiter, dum nihil amoenum et molle
   adfluentia putat, nisi quod ei Petronius adprobavisset.*

- *revolutus* from *revolvo, revolvere, revolvi, revolutus* is the perfect
  passive participle, meaning to throw back.
- *imitatione* is an ablative of cause.
- *familiarium* is a partitive genitive.
- *adsumptus est* from *adsumo, adsumere, adsumpsi, adsumptus* is 3rd singular
  perfect passive indicative, meaning to take (to/up/on/from).
- *adfluentia* is an **ablative of respect?? unsure.**
- *putat* from *puto, putare* is 3rd singular present active indicative, meaning
  to think.
- *adprobavisset* from *adprobo, adprobare* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to approve. This is a subjunctive of repeated action
  (professor told us). **But I can't find anything on this on google, so not
  entirely sure how to deal with it.**

    Then having been thrown back to vice or by the imitation of vice he was took
    on amongst the few people of familiar acquaintance to Nero, a judge of
    elegance, while he thinks nothing beautiful and pleasant with respect to
    abundance, unless what Petronius had approved for him.
