# (10) A bad moment with Varus and his girl

| *Varus me meus ad suos amores*
| *visum duxerat e foro otiosum:*

- *duxerat* from *duco, ducere, duxi, ductus* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
  indicative, meaning to lead.
- I think that *visum* (from *video, videre, vidi, visus*) is the supine of
  *duxerat*, and that *otiosum* is modifying *visum*, since they're the only
  things which match in case.

      My Varus had led me, at leisure, to his loves out of the forum to see
      them.

| *scortillum (ut mihi tum repente visum est)*
| *non sane illepidum neque invenustum;*

- *visum est* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd singular perfect passive
  indicative, meaning to see.
- *ut* in the conjunctive usage.
- Double negative here, litotes.

      A little harlot (as then it suddenly seemed to me) not reasonably lacking
      grace nor unlovely;

| *huc ut venimus, incidere nobis*
| *sermones varii, in quibus quid esset*
| *iam Bithnyia, quo modo se haberet,*
| *et quonam mihi profuisset aere.*

- *venimus* from *venio, venire, veni, ventus* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to come.
- *incidere* from *incido, incidere, incidi, incasus* is the 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to fall upon.
- *esset* is 3rd singular imperfect active subjunctive. I think indirect
  question?
- *haberet* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to hold.
- *profuisset* from *prosum, prodesse, profui, profuturus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active subjunctive, meaning to be useful (with DAT).
- Note that *-nam* is a suffix of this relative, like
- *aere* is an ablative of means.

      as we came to this place, various conversations fell upon us, in which what
      was Bithnyia now, in what manner was it holding itself, and it had
      profitited me with whatever money.

| *Respondi id quod erat:*

- *respondi* from *respondeo, respondere, respondi, responsus* is 1st singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to answer.
- *id quod erat* I have no clue.

      I answered that which was:

|                        *nihil neque ipsis*
| *nec praetoribus esse nec cohorti,*
| *cur quisquam caput unctius referret:*

- *esse* likely is setting off indirect speech, with 
- *ipsis, praetoribus,* and *cohorti* is a tricolon of dative of references.
- *referret* from *refero, referre, rettuli, relatus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to bring back. This is subjunctive likely because
  it's an indirect question.

      That there was nothing neither for themselves nor for the praetors nor for
      the court, why anyone might bring back a greasy head:

      That neither themselves nor the praetors nor the court had anything, why
      anyone might bring back a more oily head:

| *praesertim quibus esset irrumator*
| *praetor, nec faceret pili cohortem.*

- *esset* is subjunctive, likely in a relative clause of characteristic,
  functioning off of the implied indefinite antecedent *ipsis*.
- *faceret* is also subjunctive, fitting into the same relative clause of
  characteristic as *esset*.
- *pili* is a genitive of value.

      especially to those of the sort whom the praetor was a vile person, nor
      was he making the cohort worth of a hair?

| *"At certe tamen," inquiunt "quod illic*
| *natum dicitur esse, comparasti*
| *ad lecticam homines."*

- *inquiunt* from *inquit* is 3rd plural present active indicative, meaning to
  say.
- *dicitur* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd singular present passive
  indicative, meaning to say.
- *comparasti* from *comparo, comparare, comparavi, comparatus* is 2nd singular
  perfect active indicative.

      "But surely nevertheless" they say "that which is said to be born there,
      you obtained the man towards the litter."

|                       *Ego (ut puellae*
| *unum me facerem beatiorem)*
| *"Non" inquam "mihi tam fuit maligne,*
| *ut, provincia quod mala incidisset,*
| *non possem octo homines parare rectos."*

- *facerem* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 1st singular imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to make. I believe that this is a purpose clause.
- *inquam* is 1st singular present active indicative, meaning to say.
- *fuit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative.
- *incidisset* from *incido, incidere, incidi, incasus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active subjunctive, meaning to happen/fall. This is after a *quod*,
  so I think this is a causal clause. Or attracted to the overarching result
  clause.
- *possem* from *possum, posse, potui* is 1st ingular imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to be able. This takes complimentary infinitive *parare*,
  and it is subjunctive because it's a result clause.
- *parare* from *paro, parare, paravi, paratus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to prepare. 

      (So that I might make myself one more beautiful to the girl) I said "it
      was not so spiteful to me, that, because the bad province had fallen,
      I was not able to prepare 8 proper men."

| *(At mi nullus erat nec hic neque illic*
| *fractum qui veteris pedem grabati*
| *in collo sibi collocare posset.)*

- *mi* = (poetic, syncopated) dative singular of egō
- *erat* is 3rd singular imperfect active indicative.
- *fractum* from *frango, frangere, fregi, fractus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to break.
- *collocare* from *colloco, collocare, collocavi, collocatus* is the present
  active infinitive, meaning to place/put/set.
- *posset* from *possum, posse, potui* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to be able.

      (But there was no one for me neither here nor there who was able to place
      the having been broken foot of a cot on his neck.)

| *Hic illa, ut decuit cinaediorem,*
| *"Quaeso," inquit "mihi, mi Catulle, paulum*
| *istos commoda: nam volo ad Serapim*
| *deferri."*

- I think the implied subject of *illa* is that harlot he's talking too.
- *decuit* from *decet, decere, decuit* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning it is fitting. As with other impersonal verbs they take
  the accusative of respect.
- *quaeso* from *quaso, quasere* is 1st singular present active indicative,
  meaning to beg/ask.
- *commoda* from *commodo, commodare, commodavi, commodatus*, is 2nd singular
  present active imperative, meaning to lend.
- *volo* from *volo, velle, volui* is 1st singular present active indicative,
  meaning to wish. This takes *deferri* is a complimentary infinitive.
- *deferri* from *defero, deferre, detuli, delatus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to carry/bring down/off.

      Here that girl, as it is suitable for a more shameless girl, said "I beg,
      my Catullus, lend a few of those to me: For I wish to be brought back to
      Serapim."

|           *Mane," inquii puellae,*
| *"istud quod modo dixeram me habere ...*
| *fugit me ratio:*

- *mane* from *maneo, manere, mansi, mansus* is the present active imperative,
  meaning to stay.
- *dixeram* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 1st singular pluperfect active
  indicative, meaning to say.
- *habere* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is the present active
  infinitive, meaning to have. Setting off indirect speech.
- *fugit* from *fugio, fugere, fugi, fugitus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to flee/fly.

        "Stay," I said to the girl, "That which I had just now said that I had
        ... the reason flees me.

|                 *meus sodalis ---*
| *Cinna est Gaius --- is sibi paravit.*

- *paravit* from *paro, parare, paravi, paratus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to prepare.

      My acquaintance --- Cinna Gaius --- he prepared it for himself.

| *Verum utrum illius an mei, quid ad me?*
| *Utor tam bene quam mihi pararim.*

- *tam...quam* is a clause of comparison coordinating conjunction. This makes
  the verb *parare* subjunctive.

      But whether of him or of me, what to me? I use it as well as I obtain for
      myself.

| *Sed tu insula male et molesta vivis,*
| *per quam non licet esse neglegentem!"*

      You live unsalted bad and annoying, through which it is not permitted that
      one is neglectful!"
