# Chapter 1: An unexpected invitation

1. *Itaque maesti deliberabamus de malis quae nobis imminebant, cum servus
   Agamemnonis intravit et 'quid?' inquit 'nonne scitis? hodie ad cenam invitati
   estis a Trimalchione, lautissimo homine. Venite igitur; nolite morari.'*

- *deliberabamus* is 1st plural imperfect active indicative of *delibero,
  deliberare, deliberavi, deliberatus*. With *de + abl.* it can be translated as
  "to think over abl."
- *imminebant* is 3rd plural imperfect active indicative of *immineo, imminere,
  -, -*. Takes a dative, which explains why *nobis* is dative.
- *intravit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative of *intro, intrare,
  intravi, intratus*, and is setting off a temporal *cum* clause.
- *scitis* is 2nd plural present active indicative of *scio, scire, scivi,
  scitus*.
- *invitati estis* is the 2nd plural present passive indicative of *invito,
  invitare, invitavi, invitatus*
- both *venite* and *morari* are present active infinitives, *morari* is
  deponent which is why it's in the passive formation.
- *nono, nolle, nolui* and goes *nolo, nonvis, nonvult, nolomus, nonvoltis,
    nolunt*.
- **LEARN nolo, volo, velle, volui**.
- Imperative of *nolo* + infinitive = negative imperative.
- Recall deponent imperative forms.

    And so we were sadly thinking over the troubles which were threatening us,
    when the servant of Agamemnon entered and said 'What? Do you all not know?
    Today you all have been invited to dinner by Trimalcio, the most elegant
    man. So come; do not delay,'

2. *malorum igitur obliviscimur et celeriter vestimenta induimus;*

- *obliviscimur* is 1st plural present indicative of *obliviscor, oblivisci,
  olbitus sum*. This takes a genitive.
- Words of forgetting and remembering take a genitive.
- *induimus* is 3rd singular present/perfect active indicative of *induo,
  induere, indui, indutus*.

    Therefore we forget our troubles and quickly put on the clothes;

3. *et Gitona, qui libentissime servi officium agit, iubemus ad balnea nos
   sequi.*

- *agit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative of *ago, agere, egi, actus*.
- *sequi* is the present infinitive of *sequor, sequi, secutus sum*.
- *iubemus* is 1st plural present active indicative of *iubeo, iubere, iussi,
  iussus*.
- Note there's the word *balnea, balneae* and *baneum, balnei*. Only the second
  makes sense under the *ad*.
- *libentissime* is adverbial superlative.

    and we ordered Gitona, who acts the duty of a slave most willingly, to
    follow us to the baths.

4. *ubi ad balnea advenimus, errare coepimus inter eos qui lavabantur.*

- *advenimus* is 1st plural perfect active indicative.
- *coepimus* is 1st singular perfect active indicative. Recall this is
    a defective verb, only appears in the perfect.
- *lavabatur* is 3rd plural imperfect passive indicative.

    As soon as we arrived to the baths, we began to wander among the men who
    were being washed.

5. *Subito videmus senem calvum, qui inter pueros capillatos ludit pila;*
- *videmus* is 1st plural present active indicative.
- *ludit* is 3rd singular present active indicative of *ludo, ludere, lusi,
  lusus*.
- *pila* is ablative of instrument.
- *pueros capillatos* are slaves, would never wear the toga virilis.

    Suddenly we see a bald old man, who is playing among the long-haired boys
    with the ball.

6. *nec tam pueri nos ad spectaculum duxerant quam ipse senex, qui soleatus pila
   se exercebat.*

- My translation for this one sucks, I'm certain of it.
- *duxerant* is the 3rd plural pluperfect active indictave of *duco, ducere,
  duxi, ductus*.
- *exercebat* is 3rd singular imperfect active indicative of *exerceo, exercere,
  exercui, exercitus*.

    Nor had the boys led us to the spectable as much as the old man himself, who
    wearing sandles was exercising himself with a ball.

7. *numquam enim eam pilam repetebat quae terram tetigerat, sed servus follem
   plenum habebat, ex quo novas pilas sufficiebat eis qui ludebant.*

- *repetebat* is 3rd singular imperfect active indicative of *repeto, repetere,
  repetivi, repetitus*
- *tetigerat* is 3rd singular pluperfect active indicative of *tango, tangere,
  tetigi, tactus*.
- *sufficiebat* is 3rd singular imperfect active indicative of *sufficiom,
  sufficere, suffeci, suffectus*. Notes say to translate as "supplied".
- *ludebant* is 3rd singular imperfect active indicative of *ludo, ludere, lusi,
  lusus*.

    Indeed he was never retuning to that ball which had struck the ground, but
    a slave was holding a full bag, out of which he was supplying new balls to
    those who were playing.

8. *dum has miramur lautitias, accurrit menelaus et 'hic est' inquit 'apud quem
   cenabitis, et iam principium cenae videtis'.*
- *miramur* is 1st plural present passive indicative of *miror, mirari, miratus
  sum*.
- *accurrit* is 3rd singular present active indicative of *accuro, accurrere,
  accurri, accursus*.
- *cenabitis* is 2nd plural future active indicative of *ceno, cenare, cenavi,
  cenatus*.
- *videtis* is 2nd plural present active indicative *video, videre, vidi,
  visus*.

    While we are marveling at this luxuriousness, Menelaus ran up and said 'This
    is at the house of whom you all will dine at, and now you all see the
    beginning of the dinner.

9. *vix locutus erat Menelaus, cum Trimalchio digitos concrepuit; aquam poposcit
   et digitos lavit, quos in capite pueri tersit.*

- *locutus erat* is the 3rd singuler perfect passive participle, but note that
    *loquor, loqui, locutus sum* is deponent so it has active translation.
- *locutus erat* is the 3rd singuler pluperfect passive indicative, but note
    that *loquor, loqui, locutus sum* is deponent so it has active translation.
- *concrepuit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative of *concrepo,
    concrepare, concrepui, concrepitus* and is setting off a temporal *cum*
    clause. Note *digitos concrepuit* means "to snap the fingers".
- *poposcit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative of *posco, poscrere,
    poposci, -*.
- *lavit* is 3rd singuler perfect active indicative of *lavo, lavare, lavu,
    lotus*.
- *tersit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative of *tergo, tergere, tersi,
    tersus*.

    Menelaus had scarcely spoken, when Trimalchio snapped his fingers; he
    demanded water and washed his fingers, which he rubbed on the heads of boys.

10. *deinde vestitus est et in lecticam impositus.*

- *vestitus est* is the 3rd singular perfect passive indicative of *vestio,
    vestire, vestivi, vestitus*.
- *impositus* is the perfect passive participle of *impono, imponere,
    imposui, impositus*.

    Then he was clothed and situated on the litter.

11. *et dum aufertur, ad caput eius symphionacus accessit et toto itinere in
    aurem cantavit.*

- *aufertur* is 3rd singular present passive indicative of *aufero, auferre,
    abstuli, ablatus*.
- *accessit* is 3rd singuler perfect active indicative of *accedo, accedere,
    accessi, accessus*.
- *cantavit* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative of *canto, cantare,
    cantavi, cantatus*.
- *toto itinere* I think is ablative of route?

    and while he was being carried, the musical man approached to his head and
    sang in his ear within the entire journey.

12. *sequimur nos admiratione iam pleni et cum Agamemnone ad ianuam pervenimus,
    in cuius poste libellus affixus erat cum hac inscriptione:*

- *sequimur* is 1st plural present indicative of *sequor, sequi, secutus sum*.
- *pervenimus* is 1st plural perfect active indicative of *pervenio, pervenire,
  perveni, perventus*.
- Note w/ ablative or genitive *pleni* because "full of abl/gen".
- *Agamemnone* is in the ablative, seeming to indicate normal cum clause
- *affixus erat*  is 3rd singular pluperfect passive indicative

    Now full of admiration we ourselves follow and with Agamemnon reached to the
    door, on the post of which a little book had been fastened with this
    inscription:

14. *'servus qui sine domini iussu foras exierit, accipiet centum plagas'.*

- *exierit* is 3rd sigular future perfect active indicative of *exeo, exire,
  exivi, exitus*.
- *accipiet* is 3rd singuler future active indicative of *accepio, accepere,
  accepi, acceptus*.
- This is actually a conditional, whihc is a future more vivid.

    The servant who will have gone outside without the order of the master, he
    will accept 100 lashes.

15. *super limen cavea pendebat aurea, in qua pica varia intrantes salutabat.*

- *pendebat* from *pendeo, pendere, pependi, -* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active indicative. 
- *salutabat* is 3rd singular imperfect active indicative of *saluto, salutare,
  salutavi, salutatus*.
- *pica varia* notes say is a black and white magpie, and *intrantes* is people
  coming in once again by the notes. Note *intrantes* is present participle of
  *intro, intrare, intravi, intratus*, which is kind of substantataive (recall
  it's a verbal adjective).

    Above the foyer a golden cage was hanging, in which a varied magpie was
    greeting people coming in.

16. *sed ego, dum omnia miror, paene cecidi et crura mea fregi.*

- *miror* from *miro, mirare, miravi, miratus* is 1st singular present passive
  indicative.
- *omnia* is an ablative of cause probably.
- *cecidi* from *cado, cadere, cecidi, casus* is 1st singular perfect active
  indicative.
- *fregi* from *frango, frangere, fregi, fractus* is 1st singuler perfect active
  indicative.

    But I, while I was amazed by of it all, I nearly fell and broke my leg.

17. ad sinistram enim intrantibus canis ingens, catena vinctus, in pariete
    pictus est, superque quadrata littera scriptus CAVE CANEM.

- *intrantibus* is the present participle of *intro, intrare, intravi,
  intratus*. This is dative of reference "To the left from the perspective of
  those entering".
- *vinctus* from *vincio, vincire, vinxi, vinctus* is the perfect passive
  participle.
- *pictus est* from *pingo, pingere, pinxi, pictus* is the 3rd singuler perfect
  passive indicative.
- *cave* from *caveo, cavere, cavi, cautus* is the present imperative.
- *scriptus* of *scribo, scribere, scripsi, scriptus*.

    Indeed entering to the left a huge dog, having been bound by a chain, has
    been painted on the wall, and above with capital letters was written BEWARE
    OF DOG.

18. *et comites quidem mei riserunt;*.

- *riserun* from *rideo, ridere, risi, risus* is 3rd plural perfect active
  indicative. Note this is why *mei* is in dative, *ridere* takes dative.

    and indeed my comrades laughed at me;

19. *ego autem spiritum collegi et totum parietem inspicere coepi.*

- *collegi* from *colligo, colligere, collegi, collectus* is 1st singuler
  perfect active indicative.
- *inspicere* is just an infinitive pairing with *coepi* from *coepio, coepere,
  coepi, coeptus* which is 1st singular perfect active indicative.

    But I obtained my breath and began to inspect the whole wall.

20. *erat enim venalicium cum titulis pictum, et ipse Trimalchio capillatus
    caduceum tenebat et Romam intrabat.*

- *erat* 3rd singular imperfect active indicative.
- both *tenebat* from *teneo, tenere, tenui, tentus* and *intrabat* from *intro,
  intrare, intravi, intratus* are 3rd singular imperfect active indicative.

    Indeeed a slave sale had been painted with titles, and long-haired Trimalcio
    himself was holding the wand of mercury and was entering Rome.

21. *tum omnia, quae fecerat Trimalchio, pictor cum inscriptione diligenter
    reddiderat.*

- *fecerat* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
    indicative.
- *reddiderat* from *reddo, reddere, reddidi, redditus* is 3rd singular
    pluperfect active indicative, meaning to return, but specifically here to
    represent.

    Then all, which Trimalchio had done, the painter had diligently represented
    with an inscription.

22. *primum Trimalchio ratiocinari discebat, deinde dispensator factus est,
    denique Mercurius eum tollebat et in tribunal altum rapiebat;*

- *ratiocinari* from *ratiocinor, ratiocinari, ratiocinatus sum* is the
    infinitive, meaining to compute or calculate.
- *discebat* from *disco, discere, didici, discitus* is 3rd singular imperfect
    active indicative, and means to learn.
- *factus est* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 3rd singular perfect active
    indicative.
- *tollebat* from *tollo, tollere, sustuli, sublatus* is 3rd singular imperfect
    active indicative.
- *rapiebat* from *rapio, rapere, rapui, raptus* is 3rd singular imperfect
    active indicative, meaning to seize or conquer.

    First Trimalchio was learning to keep accounts, then he was made steward,
    finally Mercury was lifting him and was seizing him onto a high platform.

23. *ibi erat Fortuna, quae cornu abundanti divitias effundebat.*

- *effundebat* from *effundo, effundere, effundi, effunsus* is 3rd singular
    imperfect active indicative, meanining to pour out.

    There was fortune, who was pouring out abundant riches from the cornucopia.
