# Chapter 2: The dinner begins

1. *Nos iam ad triclinium perveneramus, in cuius prima parte dispensator
   rationes accipiebat.*

- *perveneramus* from *pervenio, pervenire, perveni, perventus* is 1st plural
    pluperfect active indicative, meaning to come to, to reach. Commonly takes
    *ad* or *in* prepositions.
- *accipietbat* from *accipio, accipere, accepi, aceptus*, is 3rd singular
    imperfect active indicative, meaning to accept.
- *prima parte* is ablative forming the ablative of place where.
- *in cuius* is a relative with antecendent *triclinium*.
- WHEN THE ADJECTIVE AND NOUN ARE ON THE DIFFERENT SIDES OF THE SENTENCE IT'S
    CALLED **HYPERBATON**.

    Now we had reached to the dining room, in the first part of which the
    steward was taking accounts.

2. et quod praecipue miratus sum, in postibus triclinii fasces erant cum
   securibus defixi, sub quibus erat scriptum:

- *miratus sum* from *miror, miravi, miratus sum* is 1st singular perfect
    indicative, meaning to be amazed.
- *erant* from - is 3rd plural imperfect active indicative.
- *defixi* from *defigo, defigere, defixi, defixus* is 1st singular perfect
    active indicative, meaning to sink, bury, or thrust.
- *erat scriptum* is strange. Resisting my instinct to call this the pluperfect
    passive indicative, I think this is just *erat* and *scriptum* seperately,
    there has to be a reason he put it in this order. Difference between "Had
    been written" and "was written".

    and what I especially marveled at, a bundle of rods with axes had been
    buried on the doorpost of the dining room, under which was written:

3. *C. POMPEIO TRIMALCHIONI, SEVIRO AUGUSTALI, CINNAMUS DISPENSATOR.*

- *seviro* comes from *sevir* or *sexvir* apparently has the definition
    "Augustalis, a member of the college of priests dedicated to Augustus"
    according to lewis and short. This usage was in one of Petronius' books.

    TO C. POMPEIO TRIMALCION, THE AUGUSTEAN PRIEST, CINNAMUS THE STEWARD.

4. *duae tabulae in utroque poste defixae erant, quarum altera hoc habebat
   inscriptum:*

- *defixae erant* is 3rd plural pluperfect passive indicative of *defigo,
    defigere, defixi, defixus*, meaning to sink/thrust/bury.
- *utroque* means to both sides, or to both places.
- *habebat* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is imperfect.
- The antecedant of *quarum* is *duae tabulae*.


    Two tablets had been stuck on both sides of the doorpost, one of which was
    holding this inscription:

5. *'ante diem tertium et pridie kalendas Ianuarias Gaius noster foris cenat.'*

- *foris* is an adverb meaning outside or outdoors.
- *ante ... Ianuarias* is one big clause.

    Our Gaius dines out before the third day and the day before January's first
    day.

6. *altera habebat lunae cursum stellarumque septem imagines pictas.*

- *pictas* is the perfect passive participle of *pingo, pingere, pinxi, pictus*,
    meaning to paint.
- Note *lunae* and *stellarum* are genitive plural.

    The other was holding the course of the moon and painted images of the seven
    planets.

7. *Iam conabamur triclinium intrare, sed exlclamavit unus ex pueris 'dextro
   pede'.*

- *conabamur* from *conor, conari, conatus sum* is 1st plural imperfect
  indicative meaning to attempt or try.
- *exclamavit* from *exclamo, exclamere, exclamavi, exclamatus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to shout.
- *dextro pede* translation is from the notes in the book.

    We were already trying to enter the dining room, but out of the boys one
    shouted 'With the right foot!'

8. *Sine dubio paulisper trepidavimus, ne contra praeceptum aliquis nostrum
   limen transiret.*

- *trepidavimus* from *trepido, trepidare, trepidavi, trepidatus* is 1st
  plural perfect active indicative, meanining to waver. Note a verb of fearing
  + *ne* or *ne non* takes a subjunctive, which results in a fear clause.
- Learn the fear clause, becuase that's what this is.
- *transiret* from *transeo, transire, transivi, transitus* is 3rd singular
  imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to cross. 

    Without doubt we wavered for a short time, lest anyone of us cross the
    threshold against instruction.

9. *tandem pariter movimus dextros gressus, sed subito servus despoliatus
   procubuit ad pedes nostros ac rogare coepit ut se poenae eriperemus;*

- *gressus* is from *gressus, gressus* (4th) meaning going, step, or foot.
- *movimus* from *moveo, movere, movi, movitus* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative.
- *despoliatus* from *despolio, despoliare, despoliavi, despoliatus* is the
  perfect passive participle meaning to strip.
- *procubuit* from *procubo, procubare, procubui, procubitus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative. meaning to lie outstretched.
- *rogare* from *rogo, rogare, rogavi, rogatus* is the present infinitive,
  meaning to ask.
- *coepit* from *coepio, coepere, coepi, coeptus* is 3rd singular
  present/perfect active indicative, meaning to begin.
- *eriperemus* from *eripio, eripere, eripui, eriptus* is 1st plural imperfect
  active subjuntive, meaning to rescue. This takes a dative. This is indirect
  command.

    Finally together we moved our right steps, but suddenly a slave having been
    stripped lay outstretched to our feet and began to ask that we rescue him
    from punishment.

10. *'nec magnum' inquit 'fuit peccatum meum, propter quod iam in periculo
    sum.'*

- antecendent of *quod* is *peccatum meum*.

    he said: 'nor was my crime large, on account of which now I am in danger.'

11. *'subducta enim mihi sunt vestimenta dispensatoris in balneo, quae vix
    fuerunt decem sestertiorum.'*

- *subducta sunt* from *subducto, subducere, subduxi, subductus* is 3rd plural
  perfect passive indicative.
- The antecendent of *quae* is *vestimenta*.
- *decem sestertiorum* is a genitive of value.

    'Indeed the steward's clothes in the bath have been stolen from me, which
    was hardly worth 10 sesterce.'

12. *Rettulimus igitur dextros pedes dispensatoremque in atrio invenimus, qui
    aureos numerabat.*

- *rettulimus* from *refero, referre, rettuli, relatus* is 1st plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to bring back.
- *invenimus* from *invenio, invenire, inveni, inventus* is 1st plural perfect
  active indicative, meanining to discover/find.
- Antecendent of *qui* is *dispensatorem*.
- *numerabat* from *numero, numerare, numeravi, numeratus* is 3rd singuler
  imperfect active indicative.

    Therefore we brought back our right foot and found the steward in the
    atrium, who was counting gold.

13. *eum precati sumus ut servo remitteret poenam.*

- *precati sumus* from *precor, precari, precatus sum* is 1st plural perfect
  passive indicative, means to beg.
- *remitteret* from *remitto, remittere, remisi, remisus* is 3rd singular
  imperfect active subjunctive, means to send back. This is also an indirect
  command.
- *servo* is dative of reference.

    We begged him that he might let the remit the penalty for the slave.

14. *superbus ille sustulit vultum et 'non tam iactura me movet' inquit 'quam
    neglegentia nequissimi servi.'*

- *sustulit* from *tollo, tollere, sustuli, sublatus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative.
- *quam + super.* should go "as .... as possible", so I tried to fit that
  paradime here because *nequissimi* is the superlative of *nequam*.
- *tam + quam*

    That overbearing man lifted his face and said 'The loss moves me not as much
    as the neglegence of the most worthless slave.'

15. *'vestimenta mea cubitoria perdidit, quae mihi natali meo cliens quidam
    donaverat, Tyria sine dubio, sed iam semel lota.'*

- *perdidit* from *perdo, perdere, perdidi, perditus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative.
- Antecedent of *quae* is *vestimenta mea cubitoria*.
- *donaverat* from *dono, donare, donavi, donatus* is 3rd singular pluperfect
  active indicative meaning to grant/give.
- *meo* is dative of reference, *mihi natali* is ablative of time when.
- *lota* from *lavo, lavare, lavi, lotus* is perfect participle.

    'he lost my dinner clothes, which a certain customer had given to me on my
    birthday, dyed with Tyrian purple without a doubt, but now having been
    washed once.'

16. *'quid ergo est? dono vobis eum.'*

- The notes say that *quid ergo est* go to "Well, what does it matter", but ask
  Professor for explaination for how that happens directly from the Latin.

    'Well, what does it matter? I grant him to you.'

17. *gratias ei egimus pro tanto beneficio et processimus ut intraremus
    triclinium.*

- *egimus* from *ago, agere, egi, actus* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative. Note with *gratias* it can be traslated as gave thanks.
- *processimus* from *procedo, procedere, processi, processus* is 1st plural
  perfect active indicative, means to proceed.
- *intraremus* from *intro, intro, intrare, intravi, intrantus* is 1st plural
  imperfect active subjunctive.

    We gave thanks to him on behalf of the great kindness and proceeded in
    order that we might enter the dining room.

18. *ecce, occurrit nobis ille idem servus pro quo rogaveramus et nobis plurima
    basia impegit et gratias egit humanitati nostrae.*

- *occurrit* from *occurro, occurrere, occurri, occursus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, taking *nobis* as a dative of reference.
- *rogaveramus* from *rogo, rogare, rogavi, rogatus* is 1st plural pluperfect
  active indicative.
- *impegit* from *impingo, impingere, impegi, impactus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative. *nobis ... impegit* the book translates as "planted
  a shower of kisses on us."
- *egit* from *ago, agere, egi, actus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative.

    Look, that same servant for whom we had asked ran up to us and thrusted very
    many kisses to us and gave thanks for our kindness.

19. *tandem ergo discubuimus.*

- *discubuimus* from *discumbo, discumbere, discubui, discubitus* is 1st plural
  perfect active indicative, meaning to recline at table.

    Therefore at last we reclined at the table.

20. *extemplo pueri alii aquam in manus infuderunt, alii insecuti sunt ad pedes
    ut paronychia tollerent.*

- *infuderunt* from *infundo, infundere, infudi, infusus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to pour in.
- *insecuti sunt* from *insequor, insequi, insectus sum* is 3rd plural perfect
    active indicative, meaning to follow/come after/attack.
- *tollerent* from *tollo, tollere, sustuli, sublatus* is 3rd plural imperfect
    active subjunctive, meaning to lift, to remove. This is in the subjunctive
    because it's initiating a purpose clause.
- Note the construction *alii ... alii* translates to some ... others.

    Immediately some boys poured water onto our hands, others attacked our our
    feet so that they might remove the paronychia.

21. *neque tamen dum hoc officium molestum agebant, tacebant, sed obiter
    cantabant.*

- *agebant* from *ago, agere, egi, actus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
    indicative, meaning to drive/act.
- *tacebant* from *taceo, tacere, tacui, tacitus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
    indicative, to be silent.
- *cantabant* from *canto, cantare, cantavi, cantatus* is 3rd plural imperfect
    active indicative, to sing or play.

    Nevertheless while they were conducting this annoying duty, they were not
    being silent, but they were singing on the way.

22. *ego experiri volui 'num tota familia ita cantat?';*

- *experiri* from *experior, experiri, expertus sum* is the present infinitive,
    meaning to find out.
- *volui* from *volo, velle, volui* is 1st singular perfect active indicative,
    meaining to wish.
- *cantat* from *canto, cantare, cantavi, cantatus* is 3rd singular present
    active indicative, meaning to sing.

    I wished to find out 'Then does the whole family sing thus?'

23. *itaque puerum rogavi ut potionem mihi afferret.*

- *rogavi* from *rogo, rogare, rogavi, rogatus* is 1st singular perfect active
    indicative, meaning to ask.
- *afferret* from *affero, afferre, attuli, allatus* is 3rd singular imperfect
    active subjunctive, meaning to bring to. This is in the subjunctive because
    it's an indirect command.

    and so I asked the boy so that he might bring the drink to me.

24. *extemplo puer imperium meum cantu excepit.*

- *excepit* from *excipio, excipere, expcepi, exceptus* is 3rd singular perfect
    active indicative, meanining to take our or to follow.
- *cantu* from *cantus, cantus* is in the 4th declension ablative of manner.

    Immediately the boy followed my order with song.

25. *pantomimi chorus, non patris familiae triclinium mihi videbatur.*

- The notes state that *pantomimi chorus* is the chorus of a pantomime.
- *videbatur* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd singular imperfect
    passive indicative, meaning to seem.
- *mihi* is dative of agent.

    It seemed to me to be the chorus of a pantomime not the dining room of
    the head of the household.

26. *allata est tamen gustatio valde lauta; nam iam omnes discubuerant praeter
    ipsum Trimalchionem, cui locus primus servabatur.*

- *allata est* from *affero, afferre, attuli, allatus* is 3rd singular perfect
    passive indicative, meaning to bring to.
- *discubuerant* from *discumbo, discumbere, discubui, discubitus* is 3rd
    pluperfect active indicative.
- *servabatur* from *servo, servare, servi, servatus* is 3rd singular imperfect
    passive indicative.

    Nevertheless very elegant appetizer have been brought; for now all besides
    Trimalchio himself had reclined, for whom the first place was being
    preserved.

27. *asellus Corinthius in mensa positus erat cum bisaccio, qui habebat olivas
    in altera parte albas, in altera nigras.*

- *positus erat* from *pono, ponere, posui, positus* is 3rd singular pluperfect
  passive indicative, meaning to put.
- *habebat* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active indicative.

    A small donkey of Corinthian bronze with a double pannier had been put on
    the table, which was holding pale olives in one part, black in another.

28. *tegebant asellum lances duae, in quibus nomen Trimalchionis inscriptum erat
    et argenti pondus.*

- *tegebant* from *tego, tegere, texi, tectus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to cover/protect.
- *inscriptum erat* from *inscribo, inscribere, inscripsi, inscriptus* is 3rd
  singulare pluperfect passive indicative.
- Is the *argenti pondus* have an implicit *sum*? Or am I wrong in saying
  *inscriptum erat* goes together and in fact are seperate.

    Two plates covered the small doney, in which the name of Trimalchio had been
    inscribed and the weight of silver.

29. *in his erant glires melle et papavere sparsi et tomacula et Syriaca pruna.*

- *erant* is 3rd plural imperfect active indicative.
- *sparsi* is the perfect passive participle of *spargo, spargere, sparsi,
  sparsus*.
- What the hell is happening here with the cases? *melle, papavere* are the in
  ablative, but why the heck is *tomaclula* and *Syriaca pruna* in the
  accusative?

    In these were dormouses scattered with honey and poppy seeds and sausages
    and Syrian prunes.
