# Chapter 3: Trimalchio makes his entrance

1. *In his eramus lautitiis, cum ipse Trimalchio ad symphoniam allatus est*.

- *allatus est* from *affero, afferre, attuli, allatus* is 3rd singular perfect
  passive indicative, meanining to bring/carry to. Since this is indicative,
  the *cum* clause it's inside must be temporal.

    We were in these splendors, when Trimalchio himself was brought out to
    a harmony.

2. *cum lecto accubuisset, pinna argentea dentes perfodiens, 'amici' inquit
   'nondum volui in triclinium venire, sed, ne diutius vos morarer, omnem
   voluptatem mihi negavi; permittite tamen mihi ut lusum finiam.'*

- *accubuisset* from *accubo, accubare, accubui, accubitus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active subjunctive, meanining to lie near/by, or to recline at
  table. This sets off a circumstancial *cum* clause.
- *lecto* is an ablative of place where.
- *pinna argentea* is an ablative of means.
- *perfodiens* is the present participle of *perfodio, perfodere, perfodi,
  perfossus*, meaning to piece or bore.
- *volui* is from *volo, volui, velle, -*.
- *morarer* from *moror, morari, moratus sum* is 1st singular imperfect
  subjunctive, meaning to delay. This is a negative purpose clause.
- *mihi* is a dative of reference.
- *negavi* from *nego, negare, negavi, negatus* means to deny.
- *permittite* from *permitto, permittere, permissi, permissus* is the plural
  active imperative, meaning to permit or relinquish. This takes dative, which
  is why *mihi* is in the dative.
- *finiam* from *finio, finire, finivi, finitus* is 1st singular present active
  subjunctive. This is setting off an indirect command (*permittite* is
  a commanding word).

    When he had reclined on the couch, piercing his teeth with a silver feather,
    he said 'Friends I did not yet wish to come into the dining room, but, lest
    I delay you any longer, I denied all pleasure for myself; Nevertheless
    relinquish me that I may finish a game.'

3. *sequebatur puer tabulam terebinthiam portans et crystallinas tesseras;*

- *sequebatur* from *sequor, sequi, secutus sum* is 3rd singular imperfect
  indicative, meanining to follow.
- *portans* from *porto, portare, portavi, portatus* is the present participle,
  meaning to carry/bring.

    A boy was following carrying a Terebinthian game board and crystal dice.

4. *et pro calculis albis et nigris aureos argenteosque habebat denarios.*

- The subject here is the *puer*, *pro calculis albit et nigris* is just one big
  prepositional phrase.

    and for white and black pieces he was holding gold and silver denarios.

5. *iam Trimalchio lusum finierat et fecerat potestatem clara voce ut hospites
   iterum potionem sumerent, cum subito signum symphonia datur et gustatoria
   a choro cantante rapiuntur.*

- *finierat* from *finio, finire, finivi, finitus* and *fecerat* from *facio,
  facere, feci, factus* are both 3rd singular pluperfect active indicative,
  meaning to limit/end and to do, respectively. Don't be tricked by *finierat*,
  the *iver* syncopates to *ier*, i.e. *finiverat $\implies$ finierat*.
- *sumerent* from *sumo, sumere, sumpsi, sumptus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to take up, which combined with the *ut* and the commanding word
  *facio* implies that it is subjunctive as an indirect command.
- *symphonia* is ablative of means.
- *datur* from *do, dare, davi, datus* is 3rd singular present passive
  indicative, meaning to give.
- *a choro cantante* is ablative of agent.
- *cantante* from *canto, cantare, cantavi, cantatus* is the present participle.
- *rapiuntur* from *rapio, rapere, rapui, raptus* is 1st singular perfect
  passive indicative. The phrase *cum ...rapiuntur* is a temporal *cum* clause.

    Then Trimalchio had finished the game and with a clear voice had given
    permission so that the guests might take up a drink again, when suddenly the
    signal is given by the music and the appetizers were seized by a singing
    choir.

6. *sed inter tumultum cum forte paropsis argentea excidisset et puer iacentem
   sustulisset, animadvertit Trimalchio colaphisque puniri puerum et proicere
   rursus paropsidem iussit.*

- *cum ...sustulisset* is a circumstantial *cum* clause.
- *excidisset* from *excido, excidere, excidi, excisus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active subjunctive, meanining to fall out/down.
- *iacentem* from *iaceo, iacere, iacui, iacitus* is the present participle,
  meaning to lie.
- *sustulisset* from *tollo, tollere, sustuli, sublatus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active subjunctive.
- *animadvertit* from *animadverto, animadvertere, animadverti, animadversus* is
  3rd singular perfect active indicative, meaning to pay attention to.
- *colaphisque* is an ablative of means.
- *puniri* from *punior, puniri, punitus sum*, meaning to punish.
- *proicere* from *proicio, proicere, proieci, proiectus*, meaning to throw
  down.
- *iussit* from *iubeo, iubere, iussi, iussus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative.
- Here I translate *rursus* as on the contrary.

    But among the commotion when a silver dessert dish had fallen down and
    the boy had raised the laying down dish, Trimalchio paid attention and
    ordered the boy to be punished with a blow of the fist and on the contrary
    to throw down the dessert dish.

7. *insecutus est servus argentumque inter reliqua purgamenta scopis coepit
   everre.*

- *insecutus est* from *insequor, insequi, insecutus sum*, meaning to follow
  after.
- *scopis* is an ablative of means.
- *coepit* from *coepio, coepere, coepi, coeptus*, meaning to begin.
- *everre* from *everro, everre, everri, eversus*, meaning to sweep.

    The slave followed after and began to sweep the silver between the remaining
    rubbish with brooms.

8. *ego interim ad eum conversus sum qui supra me accumbebat et rogavi 'quae est
   mulier illa quae huc atque illuc discurrit?'*

- *conversus sum* from *converto, converti, conversus sum*, meaning to turn
  round.
- *accumbebat* from *accumbo, accumbere, accumbi, accumbitus*, meaning to
  reclaine at the table.
- *rogavi* from *rogo, rogare, rogavi, rogatus*. 
- *discurrit* from *discurro, discurrere, discurri, discursus* is 3rd singular
  present active indicative, meaning to roam or to run/dash around/about.

    Meanwhile I turned around to he who was reclining above me and asked 'Who is
    that woman that dashes about here and there?'

9. *'uxor' inquit' Trimalchionis;'*

    He said 'The wife of Trimalchio;'

10. *'Fortunata appellatur, quae nummos modio metitur.'*

- *appellatur* from *appello, appellare, appellavi, appellatus* is 3rd singular
  present passive indicative, meaniung to call.
- *metitur* from *metior, metiri, mensus sum* is 3rd singular present
  indicative, meaning to measure.

    'She is called Fortune, who measures coins by the bushel.'

11. *'et modo, modo quid fuit?'*

- *fuit* from *sum, esse* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative.

    'and the other day, what was she?'

12. *'noluisses panem de manu illius accipere.'*

- *noluisses* from *nolo, nolle, nolui* is 2nd singular pluperfect active
  subjunctive. This is a conditional by itself, with the protasis suppressed, so
  it's past contrary to fact.
- *accipere* is the present active infinitive of *accipio, accipere, accepi,
  acceptus*, meaning to accept.

    'You would not have wished to accept bread from that woman's hand.'

13. *'nunc Trimalchionis topanta est.'*

- *topanta* = all-in-all.

    Now she is Trimalchio's all-in-all.

14. *statim allatae sunt amphorae diligenter gypsatae, quarum in cervicibus
    pittacia fixa sunt cum hoc titulo:*

- *allatae sunt* from *affero, afferre, attuli, allatus* is 3rd plural perfect
  passive indicative, meaning to bring to.
- *gypsatae* from *gypso, gypsare, gypsavi, gypsatus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to seal with gypsum. This is also in the nominative plural
  pairing with *amphorae*
- *fixa sunt* from *figo, figere, fixi, fixus* is 3rd plural perfect passive
  indicative, meaning to fasten.

    Immediately pitchers sealed with gypsum were carefully brought out, on the
    necks of which were fastened labels with this title:

15. *'Falernum Opimianum annorum centum.'*

    Falernian Opimian wine of 100 years.

16. *nobis titulos perlegentibus, complosit Trimalchio manus et 'eheu' inquit
    'ergo diutius vivit vinum quam homo.'*

- *perlegentibus* from *perlego, perlegere, perlegi, perlectus* is the present
  participle, meaning to read over/through.
- *nobis titulos perlegentibus* is an ablative absolute.
- *complosit* from *complodo, complodere, complosi, complosus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to clap.
- *diutius* is a comparative adverb, pairing with *quam*, meaning "still
  longer".
- *vivit* from *vivo, vivere, vixi, victus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative.

    While reading these labels to us, Trimalchio clapped his hands at said 'alas
    therefore wine lives still longer than man.'

17. *'quare libere bibamus.'*

- *bibamus* from *bibo, bibere, bibi, bibitus* is 1st plural present active
  subjunctive, meaning to drink. This is in the hortatory independent
  subjunctive case.

    Therefore let us freely drink.

18. *'verum Opimianum praesto.'*

- *praesto* from *praesto, praestare, praestavi, praestatus*, meaning to
  provide.

    I truly provide Opimian.

19. *'heri non tam bonum posui, et multo honestiores cenabant.'*

- *posui* from *pono, ponere, posui, positus*, meaning to put/place/set.
- *cenabat* from *ceno, cenare, cenavi, cenatus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active indicative meaning to dine.
- *multo* is the ablative of degree of difference

    Yesterday I did not place so good [a wine], and much more distinguished
    people were dining.

20. *potantibus ergo nobis et lautitias mirantibus, larvam argenteam attulit
    servus, cuius articuli in omnem partem flectebantur.*

- *pontantibus* from *poto, potari, potavi, potatus* is ablative present
  participle, meaning to drink.
- *mirantibus* from *miror, mirari, miratus sum* is ablative present participle,
  meaning to be amazed.
- *pontantibus ... mirantibus* is an ablative absolute.
- *attulit* from *affero, affere, attuli, allatus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to bring to.
- *flectebantur* from *flecto, flectere, flexi, flexus* is 3rd singular
  imperfect passive indicative, meaning to bend.

    Therefore with us drinking and marveling at the luxuries, a slave brought
    out a silver skeleton, of which the joints were being bent in all parts.

21. *cum hanc super mensam semel atque iterum obiecisset, ut aliquot figuras
    exprimeret, Trimalchio ecxlamavit:*

- *obiecisset* from *obicio, obicere, objeci, objectus* is 3rd singular
  pluperfect active subjunctive, meaning to throw before/to. This is subjunctive
  because it's forming a circumstancial *cum* clause.
- *exprimeret* from *exprimo, exprimere, expressi, expressus* is 3rd singular
  imperfect active subjunctive, meaning to squeeze out. This is subjunctive
  because it's forming a purpose clause.
- *exclamavit* from *exclamo, exclamare, exclamavi, exclamatus* meaning to
  exclaim.

    When he had thrown this [skeleton] above the table once and again, in order
    that he might form a few poses, Trimalchio exclaimed:

22. *eheu, nos miseros, quam totus homuncio nil est.*

    Alas, we [are] miserable, how the whole manikin is nothing.

23. *sic erimus cuncti, postquam nos auferet Orcus.*

- *erimus* is 1st plural future active indicative.
- *auferet* from *aufeo, auferre, abstuli, ablatus* is 3rd singular future
  active indicative, meaning to take/bear/carry away/off.

    Thus we will all be [nothing], after Orcus will snatch us.

24. *ergo vivamus, dum licet esse bene.*

- *vivamus* from *vivo, vivere, vixi, victus* is 1st plural present active
  subjunctive, meaning to live. This is an horatory independent usage.
- *licet* from *licet, licere, licuit, liciturus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning it is permitted, and takes a complimentary infinitive.

    Therefore let us live, while it is permitted to be well.

25. *Nobis sapientiam eius laudantibus subito advenerunt servi et toralia
    proposuerunt, in quibus retia erant picta venatoresque cum venabulis et
    totus venationis apparatus.*
- *laudantibus* from *laudo, laudare, laudavi, laudatus* is the present active
  participle, meaning to praise.
- *Nobis ... laudantibus* here being an ablative absolute.
- *advenerunt* from *advenio, advenire, adveni, adventus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to come to or to arrive.
- *proposuerunt* from *propono, proponere, propusui, propositus* is 3rd plural
  perfect active indicative, meaning to display.
- *erant picta* from *pingo, pingere, pinxi, pictus* is 3rd plural pluperfect
  passive indicative.

    With us praising his wisdom suddenly slaves arrived and displayed
    tapestries, in which nets had been painted and hunters with spears and all
    the instruments of hunting.

26. *cum haec miraremur, extra triclinium clamor sublatus est ingens, et, ecce,
    canes Laconici circum mensam discurrere coeperunt.*

- *miraremur* from *miror, mirari, miratus sum* is 1st singular imperfect
  subjunctive.
- *sublatus est* from *tollo, tollere, sustuli, sublatus* is 3rd singular
  perfect passive indicative.
- *discurrere* from *discurro, discurrere, discurri, discursus* is the
  inifinitve, meaning to roam.
- *coeperunt* from *coepio, coepere, coepi, coepitus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative.

    When we were marveling at these things, outside of the dining room a huge
    outcry was raised, and, look, Laconian dogs began to roam about the table.

27. *secutum est hos repositorium in quo positus est aper maximus.*

- *secutum est* from *sequor, sequi, secutus sum*.
- *positus est* from *pono, ponere, posui, positus* is 3rd singular perfect
  passive indicative.
- *maximus* is a superlative of *magnus*.

    A dish followed these dogs in which the largest boar was placed.

28. *ut aprum scinderet, accessit barbatus ingens, venatoris vestibus indutus,
    qui strinxit venatorium cultrum et latus apri vehementer percussit.*

- *scinderet* from *scindo, scindere, scidi, scissus* is 3rd singular imperfect
  active subjunctive, meaning to divide.
- *accessit* from *accedo, accedere, accessi, accessus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative and means to come near.
- *indutus* from *induo, induere, indui, indutus* is the perfect passive
  participle meanining to clothe. Indeed this takes a dative, which is why
  *vesibus* is dative (page 220).
- *strinxit* from *stringo, stringere, strinxi, strictus* meaning to draw.
- *percussit* from *percutio, percutere, percussi, percussus* is 3rd singular
    perfect active indicative meaning to beat/strike.

    In order to divide the boar, a huge beaded man came near, put on the clothes
    of a hunter, who drew the knife of a hunter and vigorously struck the flank
    of the boar.

29. *cum hoc fecisset, aves e ventre evolaverunt.*

- *fecisset* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 3rd singular pluperfect
  active subjunctive.
- *evolaverunt* from *evolo, evolare, evolavi, evolatus* is 3rd plural perfect
    active indicative, meaning to fly away.

    When he had done this, birds flew away out of it's stomach.

30. *parati aucupes cum harundinibus fuerunt, qui aves circum triclinium
    volitantes momento exceperunt*.

- *parati fuerunt* I don't know that construction this is.
- *volitantes* from *volito, volitare, volitavi, volitatus* is the present
  participle, meaning to fly about.
- *exceperunt* from *excipio, excipere, excepi, exceptus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to remove.
- *momento* seems to be ablative of time within which.

    Bird catchers with reeds had been prepared, which removed the birds flying
    about the dining room within a moment.
