# Chapter 4: The guests gossip

1. *Hoc ferculo ablato, Trimalchio surrexit et triclinio discessit.*

- *ablato* from *aufero, auferre, abstuli, ablatus*, setting off an ablative
  absolute.
- *surrexit* from *surgo, surgere, surrexi, surrectus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to rise.
- *discessit* from *discedo, discedere, discessi, discessus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to depart.

    With this dish having been carried away, Trimalchio rose and departed the
    dining room.

2. *nos, libertatem sine tyranno nacti, coepimus inter nos colloqui.*

- *nacti* from *nanciscor, nancisci, nactus sum* is perfect participle, meaning
  to obtain.
- *coepimus* from *coepio, coepere, coepi, coeptus* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to begin.
- *colloqui* from *colloquor, colloqui, collocutus sum* is the present
  infinitive, meaning to talk/speak to/with.

    We, having obtained freedom without the tyrant, began to talk amongst
    ourselves.

3. *itaque Dama primus, potione rogata, 'dies' inquit 'nihil est, dum versas te,
   nox fit.'*

- *rogata* from *rogo, rogare, rogavi, rogatus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to ask.
- *versas* from *verso, versare, versavi, versatus* from 2nd singular present
  active indicative, meaning to turn.
- *fit* from *fio, feri, factus sum* is 3rd singular present active indicative,
  meaning to happen.

    and so first Dama, with a drink having been asked for, he said 'Today is
    nothing, while you turn yourself, night happens.'

4. *'itaque nihil est melius quam de cubiculo recta in triclinium ire, et acre
   frigus habuimus.'*

- *melius* is the comparative adjective from *melior, -or, -us*.
- *ire* from *eo, ire, ivi, itus* meaning to go.
- *recta* is an adverb meaning 'straight' or 'directly'.
- *habuimus* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative.

    and so nothing is more pleasant than to go straight from the bedroom into
    the dining room, and we have held a fierce cold.

5. *'vix me balneum calfecit.'*

- *calfecit* from *calfacio, calfacere, calfeci, calfactus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to make warm.

    A bath hardly warmed me.

6. *'calida tamen potio vestiarius est.'*

- This is comparing a *calida potio* to *vestiarius*.
- *vestiarius* is a predicate nominative.

    Nevertheless the warm drink is (as good as) clothes.

7. *'plurimum bibi et plane madidus sum.'*

- *plurimum* from *plurimus, -a, -um* is a superlative.
- *bibi* from *bibo, bibere, bibi, bibitus* meaning to drink. 
- *plane* is an adverb meaning 'clearly' or 'plainly'.
- *madidus* is a predicate nominative.

    I drank very much and clearly I am drunk.

8. *'vinum in caput meum abiit.'*

- *abiit* from *abeo, abire, abivit, abitus*, meaning to depart.

    Wine has departed into my head.

9. *quibus auditis Seleucus 'ego' inquit 'non cotidie lavor; balneum enim corpus
   dilacerat, aqua dentes habet.'*

- *auditis* from *audio, audire, audivi, auditus* is the ablative perfect
  passive participle, meaning to hear. This is setting off an ablative absolute.
- *lavor* from *lavo, lavare, lavi, lautus* is 1st singular present passive
  indicative, meaning to bath.
- *dilacerat* from *dilacero, dilacerare, dilaceravi, dilaceratus* is 3rd
  singular present active indicative, meaning to tear to pieces.
- *habet* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus*.

    With those things having been heard, Seleucus said 'I do not daily bathe;
    For the bath tears apart my body, the water has teeth.'

11. *'neque lavari potui; ivi enim hodie ad funus.'*

- *lavari* from *lavo, lavare, lavi, lautus* is the present passive infinitive.
- *potui* from *possum, posse, potui*.
- *ivi* from *eo, ire, ivi, itus*.

    'Nor was I able to be bathed; For today I walked to a funeral.'

12. *'homo bellus, tam bonus Chrysanthus, diem suum obiit.'*

- *obiit* from *obeo, obire, obivi, obitus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to go to meet.

    'A nice man, so good Chrysanthus, went to meet his own day.'

13. *'modo, modo me salutavit.'*

- *salutavit* from *saluto, salutare, salutavi, salutatus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to greet.

    'The other day he greeted me.'

14. *'videor mihi etiam nunc cum eo loqui.'*

- *videor* from *video, videre, vidi, visus*  is 1st singular present passive
  indicative, meaning to see. This is passive + *mihi* dative of agent
  translating to "I seem (to myself)".
- *etiam nunc* concatenates to the phrase 'even now'.
- *loqui* from *loquor, loqui, locutus sum* is the present infinitive, meaning
  to speak.

    'Even now I seem to speak with him.'

15. *'heu, eheu!'*

    'Oh, alas!'

16. *'utres inflati ambulamus.'*

- *inflati* from *inflo, inflare, inflavi, inflatus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to blow into.
- *ambulamus* from *ambulo, ambulare* is 1st plural present active indicative,
  meaning to walk. 

    'We walk like inflated skins.'

17. *'minoris quam muscae sumus; muscae tamen aliquam virtutem habent, nos non
    pluris sumus quam bullae.'*

- *minoris* is the comparitive adjective of *parvus*, and it is a genitive of
  value; this pairs with *quam*.
- *habent* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 3rd plural present active
  indicative, meaning to have.
- *pluris* is the comparitive adjective of *multus* and is genitive of value;
  this pairs with *quam*.

    'We are of smaller value than flies; nevertheless flies have some virtue, we
    are not of more value than bubbles.'

18. *'et quid eum iuvit quod cibo abstinuit?'*

- *iuvit* from *iuvo, iuvare, iuvi, iutus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to help.
- *cibo* is dative of indirect object.
- *abstinuit* from *abstineo, abstinere, abstinui, abstentus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to withhold.
- The *quid* is the relative interrogative, *quod* is the relative pronoun.

    'and how did it help him that he abstained from food?'

19. *'quinque dies aquam in os suum non coniecit, non micam panis.'*

- *coniecit* from *cinicio, conicere, conieci, coniectus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to throw.

    'Five days he did not throw water in his mouth, not a crumb of bread.'

20. *'tamen abiit ad plures.'*

- *abiit* from *abeo, abire, abii, abitus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to go away.
- *plures* is the comparative of *multus*.

    'Nevertheless he departed to the majority.'

21. *'medici eum perdiderunt, immo malum fatum; medicus enim nihil aliud est
    quam animi consolatio.'*

- *perdiderunt* from *perdo, perdere, perdidi, perditus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning 'to ruin'.
- *immo* is a strange adverb meaning 'or rather'.
- *consolatio* is predicate nominative.
- *animi* is an objective genitive.

    'The doctors ruined him, or rather bad fate; for the doctor is nothing other
    than consolation of the mind.'

22. *'tamen bene elatus est.'*

- *elatus est* from *effero, efferre, extuli, elatus* is 3rd singular perfect
  passive indicative, meaning to carry out.

      'Nevertheless he was carried out well.'

23. *'planctus est optime, etiam si maligne ploravit uxor.'*

- *planctus est* froom *plango, plangere, planxi, planctus* is 3rd singular
  perfect passive indicative, meaning to mourn.
- *optime* is the superlative adverb of *bene*.
- *ploravit* from *ploro, plorare* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative,
  meaning to cry.

    'he was mourned very well, even if the wife cried maliciously.'
      
24. *'sed mulieres sunt pessimum genus.'*

- *pessimum* is a superlative adjective.
- *pessimum genus* are predicate nominative.

    'but women are the worst kind.'

25. *'nemo debet eis bene facere; aeque est ac si bona in puteum conicis.'*

- *debet* from *debeo, debere, debui, debitus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to owe.
- *facere* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is the present active infinitive.
- *eis* is a dative of indirect object.
- *conicis* from *cinicio, conicere, conieci, coniectus* is is 2nd singular
  present active indicative, meaning to throw.

    'No one ought to do well to them; and it is just as if you throw goods into
    the well.'

26. *molestus fuit, et Phileros eo audito proclamavit:*

- *audito* from *audio, audire, audivi, auditus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to hear. Then *eo audito* is an ablative absolute.
- *proclamavit* from *proclamo, proclamare* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to proclaim.

    He was annoying, and, with him having been heard, Phileros proclaimed:

- *proclamavit* from *proclamo, proclamare, proclamavi, proclamatus* is 3rd
  singular perfect active indicative, meaning to proclaim.

    He was annoying, and Phileros, with this having been heard, proclaimed:

27. *'vivorum meminerimus.'*

- *meminerimus* from *memini, meminisse* is 1st plural perfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to remember. Note *memini* + gen. is a construction.
  This is hortatory.

    'Let us remember the living'. 

28. *'ille habet quod sibi debebatur; honeste vixit, honeste obiit.'*

- *debebatur* from *debeo, debere, debui, debitus* is 1st singular present
  active indicative, meaning to owe.
- *vixit* from *vivo, vivere, vixi, victus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to be alive.
- *obiit* from *obeo, obire, obivit, obitus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to die.
- *honeste* is an adverb here, meaning honorably/decently.

    'That man has what was owed to him; he honorably lived, he honorably died.

29. *'quid habet quod queratur?'*

- *queratur* from *queror, queri, questus sum* is 3rd singular present
  subjunctive, meaning to complain. This is in the subjunctive because it's
  indirect question.

    'What does he have that he complains about?'

30. *'ab asse crevit et paratus fuit quadrantem de stercore dentibus tollere.*'

- *crevit* from *cresco, crescere, crevi, cretus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative meaning to grow (from).
- *paratus fuit* from  *paro, parare, paravi, paratus* meaning to prepare.
  *tollere* is a complimentary infinitive for this word.

    'He grew from an as and was prepared to raise a quadrans from the dung
    with his teeth.'

31. *'itaque crevit tamquam favus.'*

- *crevit* same as before.
- *tamquam* a conjunction meaning just as. 
- I think I have the subject and object mixed around here. Of course *cresco* is
  intransitive.

    'and indeeed he grew like an honey comb.'

32. *'mehercule, reliqui solida centum, et omnia in nummis habuit.'*

- *requi* from *reliquo, reliquere, reliqui, relictus*, meaning to abandon/leave
  behind.

    'By Hercules, he abandoned a solid hundred, and he held everything in cash.'

33. *haec locuto Philerote, Ganymedes 'meras nugas' inquit 'narratis.'*

- *locuto Philerote* is an ablative absolute.
- Now we have *meras* also meaning pure...
- *narratis* from *narro, narrare, narravi, narratus* is 2nd plural present
  active indicative.

    With Phileros having said these things, Ganymede said 'You all talk pure pubbish'

34. *'nemo interim curat quam carum sit frumentum.'*

- *curat* from *curo, curare, curavi, curatus* meaning to arrange/see/attend to.
- *sit* is 3rd singular present active subjunctive of *esse*. Subjuncitve
  because indirect question.

    'In the meantime, no one attends how expensive is grain.'

35. *'non mehercule hodie buccam panis invenire potui.'*

- *invenire* is just the infinitive of *invenio*.
- *potui* from *possum, posse, potui*.

    'By Hercules, today I was not able to come upon a mouthful of bread.'

36. *'iam totum annum esuritio fuit.'*

    'Now all year has been famine.'

37. *'aedilibus male eveniat, qui cum pistoribus colludunt "serva me, servabo
    te." heu, heu, cotidie peius!'*

- *eveniat* from *evenio, evenire, eveni, eventus* is 3rd singular present
  active subjunctive, meaning to come out/about/forth. I think this is an
  optative independent subjunctive use.
- *colludunt* from *colludo, colludere, collusi, collusus* is 3rd plural present
  active indicative, meaning to act in collusion (with)
- From *servo, servare, servavi, servatus* in the quote *serva* is the present
  active imperative and *servabo* is 1st singular future active indicative.
- *cotidie peius* is just two adverbs in a row, being colloquial.

    'May it badly come out for the aediles, who are in collusion with the bakers
    "Protect me, I will protect you." Alas, everyday worse.'

38. *'sed quare habemus aedilem pessimum, qui sibi mavult assem quam vitam
    nostram?'*

- *habemus* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is 1st plural present active
  indicative.
- *mavult* from *malo, malle, malui* is 3rd singular present active indicative,
  meaning to more greatly wish for. It's *magis* + *volo*.

    'But how do we have the worst aediles, who more greatly wish for as for
    themselves than our lives?'

39. *'itaque domi gaudet, plus in die nummorum accipiens quam alter totum
    patrimonium habet.'*

- Remember *domi* is one of those weird ones that takes locative.
- *gaudet* from *gaudeo, gaudere, gavissus sum* (semi-deponent) is 3rd singular
  present active indicative, meaning to rejoice.
- *plus* is the comparative of *multus*, meaning more.
- *accipiens* is the present active participle of *accipio, accipere, accepi,
  acceptus*, meaning to take.

    'and therefore he rejoices at home, taking more cash in the day than another
    has the whole inheritance.'

40. *'quod ad me attinet, vestes comedi et perseverante hac annona casulas meas
    vendam.'*

- *attinet* from *attineo, attinere, attinui, attentus* is 3rd singular present
  active indicative, meaning to restrain.
- *comedi* from *comedo, comedere, comedi, comestus* is 1st singular perfect
  active indicative meaning to eat.
- *perseverante* from *persevero, perseverare, perseveravi, perseveratus* is the
  present participle, meaining to persist.
- *vendam* from *vendo, vendere, vendidi, venditus* is 1st singular future
  active indicative, meaning to sell.

    As far as it hold on to me, I have eaten my clothes and with this price of
    grain perservering I shall sell my little cottages.

41. *'quid enim futurum est, si nec dei neque homines huius coloniae
    miserentur?*'

- *futurum est* is a future active periphrastic form, meaning "it is going to
  be".
- *miserentur* from *misereor, misereri, miseritus sum* is 3rd plural present
  indicative. This takes a genitive to become the construction "show pity for
  (GEN)".

    For what is it going to be, if neither the gods nor men show pity for this
    town.

42. *'omnia haec, ut ego credo, a dis fiunt.'*

- *credo* from *credo, credere, credidi, creditus*.
- *fiunt* from *fio, feri, factus sum*

    All these things, as I trust, result from the gods. 

43. *'nemo enim caelum caelum putat; nemo ieiunium servat; nemo Iovem pili facit;
    sed omnes opertis oculis bona sua computant.'*

- *putat* from *puto, putare, putavi, putatus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to think. I think this is setting off indirect speech with
  an implicit *esse*. Otherwise why the fuck is *caelum caelum* like it is.
- *computant* from *computo, computare, computavi, computatus* is 3rd plural
  present active indicative, meaning to compute.
- *opertis oculis* is an ablative absolute, since *opertis* is the perfect
  passive participle of *operio, operire, operui, opertus*, meaning to cover.

    For no one thinks that the sky is the sky; no one protects a fast; no one
    constructs a hair of Jove; but all men count their own goods with their eyes
    covered.

44. *'antea matres stolatae ibant nudis pedibus ad templum, passis capillis,
    mentibus puris, et Iovem aquam orabant.'*

- *ibant* from *eo, ire, ii, itus* is 3rd plural imperfect active indicative.
- *nudis pedibus* is an ablative of manner.
- *passis* from *pando, pandere, pandi, passus* is a perfect passive participle
  meaning to spread out. Then *passis capillis* is an ablative absolute.
- *mentibus puris* is probably also an ablative of manner.
- *orabant* takes a double accusative.

    Before stolae-wearing mothers were walking with bare feet to the temple,
    with spread out hairs, with a pure minds, and were praying to Jupiter for
    water.

45. *'itaque statim urceatim pluebat, et omnes redibant udi tamquam mures. Nunc
    autem, quia religiosi non sumus, agri iacent...'*

- *pluebat* from *pluo, pluere, pluvi* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  indicative and means to rain.
- No idea what *ucreatim* is. Tried looking it up, not even lewis and short
  knows.
- *redibant* from *redeo, redire, redii, reditus* is 3rd plural imperfect active
  indicative, meaining to retunr.
- *iacent* from *iaceo, iacere, iacui, iacitus* is 3rd plural present actice
  indicative, meaning to lie dead.

    and so immediately it was raining in buckets, and all men were retuning as
    wet mice. Now however, because we are not religious, the fields lie down.

46. *Echion autem, sermonem eius interpellans, 'oro te' inquit 'melius
    loquere'.*

- *interpellans* from *interpello, interpellare, interpellavi, interpellatus* is
  the present active participle, meaning to interrupt.
- *oro* from *oro, orare, oravi, oratus* meaning to beg. This usually takes an
  indirect command, but this can also take an infinitive. This form of *loquere*
  is strange, and given that freedmen often screw up deponents, this could be an
  intentional mistake by Petronius.
- *melius* is a comparative adverb.
- *loquere* from *loquor, loqui, locutus sum* is the present imperative.

    However Echion, interrupting his conversation, said 'I beg you, more
    pleasently speak.'

47. *'quod hodie non est, id cras erit; sic vita truditur.'*

- *truditor* from *trudor, trudere, trusi, trusus* is the passive
  imperative, meaning to thrust.

    'What today is not, tomorrow will be it; thus life is pushed along.'

48. *'et, ecce, habituri sumus munus optimum.'*

- *habituri sumus* from *habeo, habere, habui, habitus* is the active
  periphrastic, translated as we are about to habemus.

    'and, look, we are about to hold the most noble (public spectacle given as
    a) gift.'

49. *'et Titus noster magnum animum habet.'*

    'And our Titus has a great soul.'

50. *'ferrum optimum daturus est, sine fuga, canarium in medio, ut spectatores
    videant.'*

- *daturus est* from *do, dare, dedi, datus* is once again the future active
  periphrastic. 
- *videant* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 3rd plural present active
  subjunctive, meaning to see. This is a purpose clause.

    He is going to give the best iron, without flight, to the butchery in the
    middle, so that the spectators may see.
    
51. *'et habet unde; relictum est illi sestertium tricenties.'*

- *tricenties* apparently is an adverb meaning 300 times, but I'm not
  convinced. **ASK PROFESSOR**.
- *relictum est* from *relinquo, relinquere, reliqui, relictus* is 3rd singular
  perfect passive indicative, meaning to leave behind.
- *sestertium* is a genitive of value.

    and from where he has it; he has been left sesterces 300 times for that.

52. *'videris mihi, Agamemnon, dicere "quid iste loquitur molestus?" quia tu,
    qui potes loqui, non loqueris.'*

- *videris* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is 2nd singular present passive
  indicative.
- Recall *iste* is from *iste, ista, istud* which is a pronoun meaning that.
- *loquitur* from *loquor, loqui, locutus sum* is 3rd singular present
  indicative, meaning to speak.
- *loqui* is the infinitive.
- *loqueris* is 2nd singular present indicative. Technically could also be
  future, and I suppose that depends on what kind of roast Echion is trying to
  do here.

    You seem to me, O Agammemnon, to say "That annoying man says what?" because
    you, who is able to speak, do not speak.

53. *'non es nostri generis, et ideo pauperum verba derides.'*

- *nostri generis* I think is a genitive of description.
- *derides* from *derideo, deridere, derisi, derisus* is 2nd singular present
  active indicative, meaning to deride.
- *pauperum* I think is definately a partitive genitive.

    You are not of our kind, and therefore you deride the words of poor men.

54. *'tu prae litteris fatuus es; omnes id scimus.'*

- *prae* is an adverb meaning before or in front, and *litteris* fits into that.
- *fatuus* from *fatuus, fatui* is a predicate nominative here.
- *scimus* from *scio, scire, scivi, scitus* is 1st plural present active
  indicative, meaning to know.

    You are a fool in front of letters; we all know that.

55. *'quid ergo est?'*

- Remember the steward from chapter 2 "what does it matter?".

    Therefore what it is?

56. *'aliquo die tibi persuadeam ut ad villam nostram venias.'*

- *aliquo die* is an ablatime of time when.
- *persuadeam* from *persuadeo, persuadere, persuasi, persuasus* is 1st singular
  present active subjunctive. I think this is subjunctive because it's an
  independent potential clause. Also this takes the dative, which is why *tibi*
  is as it is.
- *venias* from *venio, venire, veni, vensus* is 2nd singular present active
  subjunctive, which is an indirect command.

    On some day, could I persuade you so that you may come to our villa?

57. *'inveniemus quod edamus, aut pullum aut ova.'*

- *inveniemus* from *invenio, invenire, inveni, inventus* is 1st plural future
  active indicaitve, meaning to discover.
- *edamus* is 1st plural present active subjunctive, because there is not
  an **indefinite antecedent** then it cannot be characteristic, but instead
  is relative clause of purpose.

    We will discover that which we may eat, either a chicken or an egg.

58. *'et tibi discipulus crescit filiolus meus.'*

- *crescit* from *cresco, crescrere, crevi, cretus* is 3rd singular present
  active indicative, meaning to come.
- Why is *discipulus* in the nominative? It's a predicite nominative.

    'and my little son comes to be a disciple for you.'

59. *'iam quattuor partes dicit; si vixerit, habebis bonum discipulum.'*

- *dicit* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to say.
- *vixerit* from *vivo, vivere, vixi, victus* is 3rd singular futp active
  indicative, meaning to live.
- *habebis* is 2nd singular future active indicative, meaning to have.
- This is a future more vivid with emphatic protasis conditional.

    Now he says the four parts; If he will have lived, you will have a good
    disciple.

60. *'igeniosus est, etiam si in aves morbosus est.'*

- *ingeniosus* and *morbosus* is a predicate nominative substantive adjective.

  He is ingenious, and now (even if) he is morbidly lustful onto birds.

61. *'ego iam tres cardeles eius occidi et dixi "mustella eos comedit." invenit
    tamen alias nenias et libentissime pingit.'*

- *occidi* and *dixi* from *occido, occidere, occidi, occisus* and *dico,
  dicere, dixi, dictus* respectively.
- *comedit* from *comedo, comedere, comedi, comesus* meaning to eat up.
- *invenit* from *invenio, invenire, inveni, inventus*, meaning to come upon.
- *nenias* the notes say is 'nonsense', but that doesn't match the definition
  I find when looking it up.
- *pingit* from *pingo, pingere, pinxi, pictus*, meaning to paint.

    Now I have killed three goldfinches of his and said "A weasel ate them".
    But he found other nonsense and very willingly paints.

62. *'emi ergo puero aliquot libros rubricatos, quia volo eum aliquid de iure
    gustare.'*

- *emi* from *emo, emere, emi, emptus* is 1st singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to buy.
- note *aliquot* is undeclined, but I think it's fitting with *libros
  rubricatos*.
- *aliquid* is not an adverb, it's an adjective.

    Therefore I bought some red books for him, because I wish him to somewhat
    taste of law.

63. *'haec res habet panem.'*

- *res* from *res, rei* is that stupid noun with a weird ass declension.
  Singular *res, rei, rei, rem, re* Plural *res, rerum, rebus, res, rebus*.
  Remember, it's feminine, which means that *haec* is singular.
- No idea how you get to the idiom in the notes.

    This thing has bread.

64. *'nam litteris satis inquinatus est.'*

- *inquinatus est* from *inquino, inquinare, inquinavi, inquinatus* is 3rd
  singular perfect passive indicative, meaning to pollute/stain.
- *satis* is an adverb, though apparently there is an undeclined adjective?

    Now he has been sufficiently polluted in letters.

65. *'si noluerit, destinavi illum artificium docere, aut tonstrinum aut
    praeconem aut certe causidicum, quod illi auferre nihil potest nisi Orcus.'*

- *noluerit* from *nolo, nolle, nolui* is 3rd singular future perfect active
  indicative.
- *destinavi* from *destino, destinare, destinavi, destinatus* is 1st singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to fix. I think this word is taking an
  infinitive in *docere*, and then an double accusitive in *illum artificium*.
- *tonstrinum, praeconem, causidicum* are all accusitive I think, not sure what
  construction this is.
- *potest* is 3rd singular present active indicative taking *auferro* as an
  complimentary infinitive. The subject of this is nihil, object is quod.

    If he should be unwilling, I have decided to teach that boy a trade, either
    a barber or an auctioneer or certainly a barrister, which nothing is able to
    take away from that boy except Orcus.

66. *'ideo illi cotidie clamo; "fili, crede mihi, quidquid discis, tibi discis,
    litterae thesaurus est, et artificium numquam moritur."'*

- *clamo* from *clamo, clamare* is 1st singular present active indicative.
- *illi* I think is dative indirect object to the boy.
- *crede* is the present active imperative, and *mihi* is dative because it
  takes the dative.
- *tibi* I think is the dative of advantage.
- *thesaurus* is a predicate nominative.
- *moritur* from *morior, mori, mortuus sum* is 3rd singular present
  indicative.

    Therefore I proclaim every day to that boy; "O son, believe me, whatever you
    learn, you learn for yourself, letters are a treasure, and skill never
    expires.
