# Chapter 5: A practical joke

1. *Eius modi fabulae vibrabant, cum Trimalchio intravit et, detersa fronte,
   unguento manus lavit spatioque minimo interposito 'ignoscite mihi' inquit
  'amici, multis iam diebus venter mihi non respondet'.*

- *eius modi* is genitive of description
- *vibrabant* from *vibro, vibrare* is 3rd plural imperfect active indicative,
  meaning to wave.
- *intravit* from *intro, intrare* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative,
  meaning to enter.
- *detersa* from *detergo, detergere, detersi, detersus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to wipe. This is likely working in an ablative absolute
  with *fronte*.
- *lavit* from *lavo, lavare* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative, meaning
  to wash.
- *unguento* is an ablative of intrument.
- *spatio minimo interposito* I think is an temporal ablative of absolute. It's
  just in the perfect form for it. 
- *interposito* from *interpono, interponere, interposui, interpositus* is the
  perfect passive participle, meaning to insert.
- *ignoscite* from *ignosco, ignoscere, ignovi, ignotus* is the present active
  imperative, meaning to forgive. This takes the dative, which is why *mihi* is
  so.
- *multis diebus* is an ablative of time within which and *mihi* is just
  a dative of reference.
- *respondet* from *respondeo, respondere, respondi, responsus* is 3rd singular
  present active indicative, meaning to answer.

    Stories of this type were waving around, when Trimalchio entered and, with
    his brow having been wiped, washed his hands with scent and with a very
    brief interval having been inserted said 'forgive me, friends, now since 
    many days my stomach is not answering to me.'

2. *'nec medici me iuvare possunt.'*

- *iuvare* from *iuvo, iuvare, iuvi, iutus* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to help.
- *possunt* is 3rd plural taking *iuvare* from *iuvo, iuvare, iuvi, iutus* means
  to help.

    Nor are doctors able to help me.

3. *'profuit tamen mihi malicorium et iam, spero, aliquid recreatus sum;'*

- *profuit* from *prosum, prodesse, profui, profuturus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indiciative, meaning to be useful. This takes a dative, *mihi*.
- *spero* from *spero, sperare, speravi, speratus* meaning to hope.
- See the book notes, *aliquid* is an adverb here meaning somewhat.
- *recreatus sum* from *recreo, recreare, recreavi, recreatus* is 1st singular
  peftect passive indicative, meaining to restore.

    Nevertheless malicorium benefited me and now, I hope, I was
    somewhat restored.

4. *'alioquin circa stomachum mihi sonat, putes taurum.'*

- *sonat* from *sono, sonare* is 3rd singular present active indicative, meaning
  to sound/echo/resound.
- *putes* from *puto, putare* is 2nd singular present active subjunctive.
  This sets off a potential independent subjunctive usage.

    Otherwise it makes a noise for me around the stomach, you would think it was a bull.

5. *'itaque si quis vestrum voluerit exire, non est cur eum pudeat.*

- "After *si, nisi, num,* and *ne* all the ali-s fall away. Thus *si quis* is
  really *si aliquis*, which is just 'if anyone' or 'if someone'.
- *voluerit* from *volo, velle, volui* is 3rd singular future perfect active
  indicative.
- *pudeat* from *pudeo, pudere, pudui, puditus* is 3rd singular present active
  subjunctive. this takes the person being ashamed in the accusative. 
- I have this translated as a mixed future more vivid with emphatic protasis
  with a future less vivid apodosis. It could also be a future more vivid with
  emphatic protasis with the apodosis suppressed, and just an independent
  subjunctive potential clause for the *pudeat*.
  
    and so if anyone of you shall have wished to leave, it is not why he would be
    ashamed.

6. *'nemo nostrum solide natus est.'*

- *natus est* from *nascor, nasci, natus sum* is 3rd singular perfect
  indicative, meaning to be born.
- *solide* is an adverb, see Lewis and Short.

    No one of us is solidly born.

7. *'ego nullum puto tantum tormentum esse quam se continere.'*

- *puto* from *puto, putare* is 1st singular present active indicative, meaning
  to think. This is setting off indirect speech.
- *nullum tantum* are adjectives modifying *tormentum* which is the accusative
  in the indirect speech.
- *quam* here is an conjunction, which is why there is no need for there to be
  a subjunctive.
- *continere* from *contneo, continere, continui, contentum* is the infinitive
  meaning to limit.

    I think that there is no so great torment than to hold oneself in.

8. *'multos scio sic periisse, dum nolunt sibi verum dicere.'*

- *scio* from *scio, scire, scivi, scitus* is 1st singular present active
  indicative, meaning to know. This opens up indirect speech with *periisse*.
- *periisse* must be the perfect infinitive of *pereo, perire, perivi, peritus*,
  meaning to die.
- *verum* must be an adverb, *veritatis* is the noun form.

    I know that many men have died in such a way, while they do not wish to talk
    to themselves truly.

9. *gratias agimus liberalitati indulgentiaeque eius, multum bibentes ut celemus
   risum.*

- *agimus* from *ago, agere, egi, actus* is 1st plural present active
  indicative.
- *bibentes* from *bibo, bibere, bibi, bibitus* is the present participle,
  meaning to drink.
- *celemus* from *celo, celare* is 1st plural present active subjunctive,
  meaning to conceal. This is subjunctive because it's working inside of
  a purpose clause.

    We give thanks for the frankness and indugence of him, drinking much so that
    we may conceal laughter.

10. *nec adhuc sciebamus nos non iam ad mediam cenam advenisse.*

- *sciebamus* from *scio, scire, scivi, scitus* is 1st singular imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to know.
- *advenisse* from *advenio, advenire, adveni, adventus* is the perfect
  infinitive, meaning to come to. This is indirect statement.

    Now were we yet understanding that even now we had not yet come to the
    middle of the dinner.

11. *nam, mensis ad symphoniam mundatis, tres albi sues in triclinium adducti
    sunt capistris et tintinnabulis culti, quorum unum bimum esse dicebat
    servus, alterum trimum, tertium sexennem.*

- *mundatis* from *mundo, mundare* is perfect passive participle meaning to
  clean.
- *adducti sunt* from *adduco, adducere, adduxi, adductus* is 3rd singular
  perfect passive indicative, meaning to lead up/to/away.
- *culti* from *colo, colere, colui, cultus* is the perfect passive participle
  (not ablative), meaning to adorn.
- *capistris et tintinnabulis* is ablative of manner.
- Note that *esse* sets of indirect speech, but since *dicebat* is imperfect,
  it's time subsequent to the past, i.e. the past. Thus we translate it as was.
- *dicebat* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  indicative, meaning to speak.

    For, with the tables having been cleaned to music, three white pigs were
    lead up into the dining hall having been adorned with muzzles and bells, of
    which a slave was saying that one was two, another was three, a third was
    six.

12. *ego putabam porcos, sicut in circulis mos est, portenta aliqua facturos
    esse.*

- *putabam* from *puto, putare* is 1st singular imperfect active indicative,
  meaning to think.
- *portenta* from *portentum, portenti* means an omen/portent, but the book has
  it translated as 'tricks'.
- This is indirect speech set off by *facturos esse*, which is the future active
  infinitive of *facio*.

    I was thinking that the pigs, just as is custom in circles, were about to do
    some tricks.

13. *sed Trimalchio, ne diutius miraremur, 'quem' inquit 'ex eis vultis in cenam
    statim caedi?'*

- *miraremur* from *miro, mirari, miratus sum* is 1st plural imperfect
  subjunctive, meaning to be amazed. This is fitting within a negative purpose
  clause set off by the *ne*.
- *vultis* from *volo, velle, volunt* is 2nd plural present active indicative,
  meaning to wish. It takes *caedi* as a complimentary infinitive.
- *caedi* from *caedo, caedere, cecidi, caesus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to cut.

    But Trimalchio, lest we marvel any longer, said 'which out of these do you
    all wish to immediately be cut into diiner?'

14. *tum cocum vocari iussit et non exspectata electione nostra maximum iussit
    occidi.*
- *vocari* from *voco, vocare* is the present passive infinitive.
- *iussit* from *iubeo, iubere, iussi, iussus* is 3rd singular perfect active
  indicative.
- *exspectata* from *exspecto, exspectare* is the perfect passive participle,
  and here *non ... nostra* is an ablative absolute.
- *occidi* from *occido, occidere, occidi, occisus* is the present passive
  infinitive, meaning to kill.

    Then he ordered the cook be called and, with our choice not having been
    expected, he ordered the largest pig to be killed.

15. *tum clara voce:*

- *clara voce* is ablative of manner.

    Then with a clear voice:

16. *'ex quota decuria es?'*

- *quota* from *quotus, quota, quotum* is an adjective usually meaning what
  number of?

    'you are from which division?'

17. *ille respondit se ex quadragesima esse.*

- *respondit* from *respondeo, respondere, respondi, responsus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative.
- This is indirect speech again, that's why *se* is accusative.
- *quadragesima* = fourtieth.

    That man responded that he is from the fourtieth (division).

18. *cui Trimalchio 'utrum emptus es an domi natus?'*

- *cui Trimalchio* borrows the *respondit* from the previous sentence.
- *utrum... an* $\implies$ whether... or, introduces a quesiton, here it's
  a direct question.
- *emtpus* and *natus* from *emo, emere, emi, emptus* and *nascor, nasci, natus
  sum* are both perfect passive, and I think the *esse* distributes so that
  they both become perfect "passive" (*nascor* is deponent).
- *domi* is locative.

    To which Trimalchio responded 'Whether were you bought or were you born at
    home?'

19. *'neutrum' inquit cocus 'sed testamento Pansae tibi relictus sum.'*

- *relictus sum* from *relinquo, relinquere, reliqui, relictus* is 1st singular
  perfect passive indicative, meaning to abandon.
- *Pansa* in Lewis and Short could mean broad footed, or it could be a Roman
  surname, but since it's capitalized here I think it's probably the surname.
- *testamento Pansae tibi*, ablative of means (*testamento* is inanimate so not
  agent), genitive of possesion, dative of reference.

    The cook said 'neither but I was left to you by the testament of Pansa.'

20. *'vide ergo' ait Trimalchio 'ut diligenter ponas; si non, te iubebo in
    decuriam viatorum conici.'*

- *vide* from *video, videre, vidi, visus* is the present imperative.
- *ait* from *aio, -, -* is 3rd declension *io*, irregular, and highly
  defective. Here it's 3rd singular present active indicative, meaning to say.
- *ponas* from *pono, ponere, posui, positus* is 2nd singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to put/place. I think that this is an indirect command.
- *conici* from *conicio, conicere, conieci, coniectus* is the passive
  infinitive, meaning to throw.

    'Therefore see' Trimalchio says 'that you diligently put it; if not, I will
    order you to be thrown into the group of messengers.

21. *et cocum quidem potentiae domini admonitum ad culinam obsonium duxit.*

- *potentiae* is dative of agent, and *domini* is genitive of possesion.
- *admonitum* from *admoneo, admonere, admonui, admonitus* is the perfect
  passive participle, meaning to admonish. *admonere aliquem alicuius rei*
  warned some of something. Admonere takes accusative then genitive
  construction.
- The notes say to translate *obsonium duxit* as "the dish (to be) lead the
  cook", but I think I'm confused by the english meaning of that. Note, *cocum*
  from *cocos, coci* can only be accusative, so this is the only way to word it.

    and the food indeed led the cook, having been admonished by his master's
    power, to the kitchen.

22. *Trimalchio autem miti ad nos vultu respexit et 'vinum' inquit 'si non
    placet, mutabo.'*

- *miti vultu* is ablative of description.
- *respexit* from *respicio, respicere, respexi, respectus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to look back at
- *placet* from *placeo, placere, placui, placitus* is 3rd singular present
  active indicative.
- *mutabo* from *muto, mutare* is 1st singular future active indicative.

    However Trimalchio looked back to us with a mild face and said 'The wine, if
    it is not pleasing, I will change it.

23. *deorum beneficio non emo, sed quidquid ad salivam facit in praedio nascitur
    eo, quod ego adhuc non novi.'* 

- *deorum* is an objective genitive (the object of an action or feeling),
- *beneficio* I think is an ablative of cause.
- *emo* from *emo, emere, emi, emptus* is 1st singular present active
  indicative, meaning to buy.
- *facit* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to make.
- *nascitur* from *nasco, nasci, natus sum* is 3rd singular present indicative,
  meaning to be born.
- *novi* from *nosco, noscere, novi, notus* is 1st singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to learn. I'm using the present perfect here.

    I do not buy on account of the gods' benefit, but whatever makes to saliva
    is born in that farm, which I have not yet got to know.

24. *'dicitur esse prope Tarentum.'*

- *dicitur* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd singular present passive
  indicative, meaining to say. This is setting off indirect speech with *esse*.

    It is said that it is near Tarentum.

25. *'nunc coniungere agellis meis Siciliam volo, ut, cum ad Africam voluero
    ire, per meos fines navigem.'*

- *coniungere* from *coniungo, coniungere, coniunxi, coniunctus* is the
  present active infinitive, meaning to join together.
- *agellis meis* is an ablative of means.
- *volo* from *volo, velle, volui*, taking *coniungere* as it's infinitive.
- *voluero* from the same as above is 1st singular future perfect active
  indicative. Note, although this looks very suspiciously like 1st singular
  subjunctive perfect, that would be *voloerim*. Therefore this *cum* clause
  must be temporal. I'm suspicious about the "shall have wanted" though...
- *ire* from *eo, ire, ivi, itus* is just the infinitive pairing with *voluero*.
- *navigem* from *navigo, navigare* is 1st singular present active subjunctive,
  meaning to sail. This is subjunctive because it's in a purpose clause, set off
  by the *ut*.

    Now I wish to join together Sicily with my little farms, so that, when
    I shall have wanted to go to Africa, I sail through my land.

26. *'sed narra tu mihi, Agamemnon, quam controversiam hodie egisti?'*

- *narra* from *narro, narrare* is the present active imperative, meaning to
  tell. 
- *mihi* is dative of indirect object.
- *quam* is the interrogative adjective.
- *egisti* from *ago, agere, egi, actus* is 2nd singular perfect active
  indicative, meaning to conduct.

    But, you narrate for me, Agamemnon, which debate did you conducted today?

27. *'ego etiam si causas non ago, in domesticum usum litteras didici.'*

- In Traupman there is an entry for *etiamsi* meaning even if.
- Note *causam agere* = "to plead in court", an idiom.
- *didici* from *disco, discere, didici, discitus*, meaning to learn.
- *usum* from *usus, usus (4th)*, a noun. Not from *utor, uti, usus sum*.

    Even if I do not plead cases, I learned letters in domestic use.

28. *'et ne me putes studia contemnere, duas bibliothecas habeo, unam Graecam,
    alteram Latinam.'*

- *putes* from *puto, putare, putavi, potatus* is 2nd singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to think. This is subjunctive because it's a prohibition
  independent usage.
- *contemnere* from *contemno, contemnere, contempsi, contemptus* is the present
  active infinitive, meaning to think little of.
- Note *Graecam* and *Latinam* are likely adjectives here, but both are in the
  accusative. I think that this is a predicate accusative structure, but not
  sure.

    'and lest you think that I look down on studies, I have two libraries, one
    Greek, the other Latin.'

29. *'dic ergo, si me amas, peristasim declamationis tuae.'*

- *dic* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is the present active imperative,
  meaning to say. Note that this is an irregular formation. *Dic duc fac fer*
  should have an e but it isn't there.
- *persistasim* means "the outline" by the book notes.
- *declamationis tuae* is a partitive genitiive.

    'Therefore speak, if you love me, the outline of your declamation.'

30. *cum dixisset Agamemnon:*

- *dixisset* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd singular pluperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to say. This is subjunctive because it's in
  a circumstancial *cum* clause, and because it's pluperfect it's in the past.

    When Agamemnon had said:

31. *'pauper et dives inimici erant', ait Trimalchio 'quid est pauper?' 'urbane'
    inquit Agamemnon et nescioquam controversiam exposuit.*

- *ait* from *aio, -, -* is 3rd declension *io*, irregular, and highly
  defective. Here it's 3rd singular present active indicative, meaning to say.
- The notes say to translate *urbane* as "wittily (said)". 
- *nescioquam* = 'some or another' by the notes.
- *exposuit* from *expono, exponere, exposui, expositus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to explain.

    'The poor and rich men were enemies', Trimalchio says 'what is poor?'
    'witty' said Agamemnon and explained some or another debate.

32. *statim Trimalchio 'hoc' inquit 'si factum est, controversia non est; si
    factum non est, nihil est'*

    Immediately Trimalchio said 'this if it was done, is not a debate; if it was
    not done, it is nothing.'

33. *talia efflabat cum repositorium cum sue ingenti mensam occupavit.*

- *efflabat* from *efflo, efflare* is 3rd singular imperfect active indicative,
  meaning to blow or breath out.
- *occupavit* from *occupo, occupare* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative,
  meaning to seize.
- The first *cum* is setting off a *cum* clause, temporal because *occupavit* is
  indicative. The second *cum* is just a preposition.

    He was blowing out such things when the dish with the huge pig occupied the 
    table.

34. *mirari coepimus celeritatem et iurare ne gallum quidem tam cito coqui
    posse.*

- *mirari* from *miro, mirari, miratus sum* is the present infinitive.
- *iurare* is the present active infinitive of *iuro, iurare, iuravi, iuratus*,
  meaning to swear.
- *coepimus* from *coepio, coepi, coeptus* is 1st plural perfect active
  indicative. 
- *ne...quidem* = "not...even".
- *tam cito* are the two adverbs "so" and "quickly".
- *posse* here is setting off indirect speech, and as usual it's taking an
  infinitive *coqui* from *coquo, coquere, coxi, coctus* which is the present
  passive infinitive.

    We began to marvel at the speed and began to swear that not even chicken
    can be cooked so quickly.

35. *deinde Trimalchio porcum intuens 'quid? quid?' inquit 'porcus hic non est
    exinteratus?'*

- *intuens* from *intueor, intueri, intuitus sum* is the present participle
  meaning to look at (it's probably nom.).
- *est exinteratus* from *exintero, exinterare* is 3rd singular perfect passive
  indicative, meaning to gut.

    Then Trimalchio looking at the pig said 'what? what? This pig has not been
    gutted?'

36. *'non mehercule est.'*

    'By Hercules it is not.'

37. *'voca, voca cocum.'*

- *voca* from *voco, vocare* is the present active imperative, meaning to call.

    'Call, call the cook.'

38. *cum constitisset ad mensam cocus tristis et diceret se oblitum esse
    exinterare, 'quid? oblitus?' Trimalchio exclamat.*

- *constitisset* from *consisto, consistere, constiti, constitus* is 3rd
  singular pluperfect active subjunctive, meaning to stop. This is subjunctive
  because it's inside of a circumstantial *cum* clause.
- *diceret* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  subjunctive. is this subjunctive because it's also living inside of the *cum*
  clause?
- *oblitum esse* from *obliviscor, oblivisci, oblitus sum* is the perfect
  passive infinitive, meaning to forget.
- *exinterare* from *exintero, exinterare* is the present active infinitive.

    When the sorrowful cook had stopped at the table and was saying that he had
    forgotten to gut it, Trimalchio exclaimed 'What? forgot?'

39. *'putes illum piper et cuminum non coniecisse.'*

- *putes* from *puto, putare* is 2nd singular present active subjunctive,
  meaning to think. This is subjunctive because it's a independent potential
  subjunctive (see book note)
- *coniecisse* from *conicio, conicere, conieci, coniectus* is the perfect
  active infinitive, meaning to throw together. This is setting off indirect
  speech.
- What Trimalchio is saying, I have no goddamn clue.

    'You would think that man had not thrown together pepper and cumin.'

40. *'despolia eum.'*

- *despolia* from *despolio, despoliare* is the present active imperative,
  meaning to strip.

    Strip him.

41. *non fit mora.*

- *fit* from *fio, fieri, factus sum* (semi-dep) is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning is passive of *facere*.
    
    Delay did not happen.

42. *despoliatus cocus inter duos tortores maestus constitit.*

- *despoliatus* from *despolio, despoliare* is the perfect passive participle,
  meaning to strip.
- *constitit* from *consisto, consistere, constiti, constitus* is 3rd singular
  perfect active indicative, meaning to stand.

    The sad stripped cook stood between the two torturers.

43. *deprecari omnes coeperunt et dicere:*

- *deprecari* from *deprecor, deprecari, deprecatus sum* is the present
  infinitive, meaning to entreat/pray/beg.
- *coeperunt* from *coepio, coepere, coepi, coeptus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to begin. This takes *dicere* and *deprecari* as
  it's complimentary infinitive.
- *dicere* from *dico, dicere, dixi, dictus* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to say. 

    Everyone began to beg and say:

44. *'solet fieri; rogamus ut remittas eum.'*

- *solet* from *soleo, solere, solitus sum* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to become accustomed to.
- *fieri* from *fio, fieri, factus sum* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning is passive of *facere*.
- *rogamus* from *rogo, rogare* is 1st plural present active indicative, meaning
  to ask.
- *remittas* from *remitto, remittere, remisi, remissus* is 2nd singular present
  active subjunctive, meaning to remit. This is subjunctive because it's in an
  indirect command set off by the *ut*.

    'it is in the habit to happen; we ask that you remit him.'

45. *'postea si fecerit, nemo nostrum pro illo rogabit.'*

- *fecerit* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 3rd singular future perfect
  active indicative, meaning to make/do/act.
- *nostrum* is a partitive genitive.
- *rogabit* from *rogo, rogare* is 3rd singular future active indicative,
  meaning to ask.
- The conditional in this sentence is a future more vivid with emphatic
  protasis.

    'Afterward if he shall have done it, no one of us will ask on behalf of that
    cook.'

46. *ego, vir crudelissimae severitatis, non potui me tenere, sed inclinatus ad
    aurem Agamemnonis 'plane' inquam 'hic debet esse servus nequissimus.'*

- *potui* from *possum, posse, potui*, meaning to be able.
- *tenere* from *teneo, tenere, tenui, tentus* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to hold.
- *inclinatus* from *inclino, inclinare* is the perfect passive participle,
  meaning to lower.
- *inquam* is 1st singular present active indicative, meaning to say.
- *debet* from *debeo, debere, debui, debitus* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to owe.
- *servus* is predicate nominative.
- *nequissimus* is a undeclined adjective, superlative of *nequam*.

    I, a man of the cruelest severity, could not hold myself, but bent to the
    ear of Agamemnonis said 'clearly this man ought to be the most worthless
    slave.'

47. *'num quis potest oblivisci porcum exinterare?'*

- "After *si, nisi, num,* and *ne* all the ali-s fall away. Thus *num quis* is
  really *num aliquis*, which is just 'anyone' or 'someone'.
- *num* (in a direct question) is a particle expecting a negation, i.e. *num
  sparta insula est* $\implies$ 'Sparta's not an island?'. Basically, it turns
  this into a rhetorical question.
- *potest* from *possum, posse, potui* is 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to be able.
- *oblivisci* from *obliviscor, oblivisci, oblitus sum* is the present
  infinitive, meaning to forget.
- *exinterare* from *exintero, exinterare* is the present active infinitive,
  meaning to gut.

    'can anyone forget to gut the pig?'

48. *'at Trimalchio relaxato in risum vultu 'ergo' inquit 'quia tam malae
    memoriae es, palam nobis illum exintera.'*

- *relaxato vultu* is an ablative absolute.
- *relaxato* from *relaxo, relaxare* is the perfect passive participle, meaning
  to relax.
- *risum* can realistically come from both *rideo, ridere, risi, risus* or
  *risus, risus*, it's easy to translate as the noun.
- *exintera* from *exintero, exinterare* is the present active imperative,
  meaning to gut.
- *nobis* is a dative of reference.

    But Trimalchio with his face having been relaxed into laughter said
    'Because you are of such a bad memory, publicly gut that pig for us.

49. *recepta cocus tunica cultrum arripuit porcique ventrem hinc et illinc
    timida manu secuit.*

- *recepta tunica* is an ablative of seperation.
- *recepta* from *recipio, recipere, recepi, receptus* is the perfect passive
  participle, meaning to recover.
- *arripuit* from *arripio, arripere, arripui, arreptus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to take hold of.
- *timida manu* is an ablative of instrument. 
- *secuit* from *seco, secare* is 3rd singular perfect active indicative,
  meaning to cut.

    The cook took hold of the knife from the recovered tunic and with a timid
    hand cut the stomach of the pig from here to there.

50. *nec mora, ex plagis crescentibus tomacula cum botulis effusa sunt.*

- *crescentibus* from *cresco, crescere, crevi, cretus* is the present
  participle, meaning to come forth.
- *effusa sunt* from *effundo, effundere, effudi, effusus* is 3rd plural perfect
  passive indicative, meaning to stretch/spread out.

    Nor with delay, sausages with black pudding were poured out from the growing
    slits.
