# Chapter 6: A history lesson and an accident

1. *Plausum post hoc servi dederunt et "Gaio feliciter" conclamaverunt.*

- *dederunt* from *do, dare, dedi, datus* is 3rd plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to give.
- apparently *eveniat* must be supplied into *Gaio feliciter*.
- *conclamaverunt* from *conclamo, conclamare* is 3rd plural perfect active
  indicative.

    after this the servants gave applause and shouted "happily to Gaius".

2. *Et cocus potione honoratus est et argentea corona poculumque accepit in
   lance Corinthia.*

- *potione et argentea corona* is ablative of means.
- *honoratus est* from *honoro, honorare* is 3rd singular perfect passive
  indicative, meaning to honor.
- *accepit* from *accipio, accipere, accepi, acceptus* is 3rd singular perfect
  active indicative, meaning to take.

    and the cook was honored with a drink and a silver crown and accepted a cup
    on a dish of Corinthian bronze.

3. *Quam cum Agamemnon propius consideraret, ait Trimalchio:*

- I **think** the antecedent of *quam* of the dish.
- *consideraret* from *considero, considerare* is 3rd singular imperfect active
  subjunctive, meaning to consider closely. This is subjunctive because it sets
  off a *temporal* cum clause.

    which when Agamemnon was considering it closely, Trimalchio said

4. *'solus sum qui vera Corinthia habeam.'*

- *solus* is predicate nominative.
- *habeam* from *habeo, havere, habui, habitus* is 1st singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to hold. This is subjuncitve because it's in a relative
  clause of characteristic.

    I am the only man who has true Corintian bronzes.

5. *'et forsitan quaeris quare solus Corinthia vera possideam:'*

- *quaeris* from *quaero, quarere, quaesivi, quasitus* is 2nd singular present
  active indicative, meaning to seek.
- *possideam* from *possideo, possidare* is 1st singular present active
  subjunctive, meaning to hold. This is subjunctive because it's an indirect
  question.

    and you are perhaps asking in what way only I hold true Corinthian bronzes:

6. *'quia scilicet aerarius a quo emo Corinthus vocatur.'*

- *aerarius* = 'bronze smith' by Balme's notes.
- *emo* from *emo, emere, emi, emptus* is 1st singular present active
  indicative, meaning to buy.
- *voco, vocare, vocavi, vocatus* is 3rd singular present passive indicative,
  meaning to call.

    because of course the bronzesmith from who I buy is called Corinthus.

7. *'et ne me putetis nesapium esse, valde bene scio unde Corinthia nata sint.'*

- *putetis* from *puto, putare* is 2nd plural present active subjunctive,
  meaning to think. This is a negative jussive clause, inside of which is
  indirect speech.
- *nata sint* from *nascor, nasci, natus sum* is 3rd plural perfect subjunctive,
  meaning to be born. This is subjunctive because it's an indirect quesiton.

    and lest you all think that I am an ignoramus, I very well know from where
    Corinthian bronzes were born.

8. *'cum Ilium captum esset, Hannibal, homo vafer et magnus stelio, omnes
   statuas aeneas et aureas et argenteas in unum rogum congessit et eas
   incendit.'*

- *captus esset* is 3rd singular pluperfect passive subjunctive. This is
  a circumstantial *cum* clause.
- *congressit* from *congero, congerere, congessi, congestus* and *incedit* from
  *incendo, incendere, incendi, incensus* are both 3rd singular present active
  indicative, meaning to collect and to burn respectively.

    When Troy had been captured, Hannibal, a sly man and a great snake,
    collected all bronze, gold, and silver statues in one pile and set fire to
    them.

9. *'ita ex hac massa fabri sustulerunt et fecerunt pocula et statuas.'* 

- *sustulerunt* from *tollo, tollere, sustuli, sublatus* is 3rd plural perfect
  active indicative, meaning to lift.
- *deverunt* from *facio, facere, feci, factus* is 3rd plural perfect active
  indicative, meaning to make.

    Thus out from this mass of metal artisans lifted and made cups and statues.

10. *'Sic Corinthia nata sunt.'*

- *nata sunt* from *nascor, nasci, natus sum* is 3rd plural perfect indicative,
  meaning to be born.

    Thus Corinthian bronzes were born.

11. *'Sed ego malo mihi vitrea; certe non olent.*'


- *olent* from *oleo, olere, olui* is 3rd plural present active indicative,
  meaning to smell of.

  **IDK**; certainly they did not smell.

12. *'et si non frangerentur, mallem mihi quam aurum.'*

- present contrary to fact.

13. *'nunc autem vilia sunt.'*
14. *'fuit tamen faber qui fecit phialam vitream quae non frangebatur.'*
15. *'admissus ergo ad caesar rogavit num novum genus phialiae videre vellet;'*
16. *'deinde phialam porrexit et in pavimentum proiecit.'*
17. *'Caesar quam maxime timuit.'*
18. *'at ille sustulit phialam de terra; collisa erat tamquam vasum aeneum;
    deinde martiolum de sinu protulit et phialam facillime correxit.'*
19. *'hoc facto putabat se solium Iovis tenere, utique postquam Caesar illi
    dixit:'*
20. *'"num quis scit quomodo fiant haec vitrea?" vide modo.'*
21. *'postquam faber negavit quemquam alium talia vitrea facere posse, iussit
    illum Caesar decollari.'*
22. *'quaeritis cur hoc fecerit?'*
23. *'quia, si scitum esset, aurum pro luto haberemus.'*
