[1] Next will I discourse of Heaven’s gift, the honey from the skies. On this
part, too, of my task, Maecanas, look with favour. The wondrous pageant of
a tiny world – chiefs great-hearted, a whole nation’s character and tastes and
tribes and battles – I will in due order to you unfold. Slight is the field of
toil; but not slight the glory, if adverse powers leave one free, and Apollo
hearkens unto prayer.

[8] First seek a settled home for your bees, whither the winds may find no
access – for the winds let them not carry home their food – where no ewes or
sportive kids may trample the flowers, nor straying heifer brush off the dew
from the mead and bruise the spring blade. Let the spangled lizard with his
scaly back be also a stranger to the rich stalls, and the bee-eater and other
birds, and Procne [the swallow], with breast marked by her blood-stained hands.
For these spread havoc far and near, and, while the bees are on the wing, carry
them of in their mouths, a sweet morsel for their cruel nestlings. But let clear
springs be near, and moss-green pools, and a tiny brook stealing through the
grass; and let a palm or huge wild olive shade the porch, so that, when the new
kings lead forth the early swarms in the spring they love, and the youth revel
in their freedom from the combs, a bank near by may tempt them to quit the heat,
and a tree in their path may hold them in its sheltering leafage. In the midst
of the water, whether it stand idle or flow onward, cast willows athwart and
huge stones, that they may have many bridges whereon to halt and spread their
wings in the summer sun, if haply the East Wind has sprinkled the loiterers or
with swift gust has plunged them in the flood. All about let green cassia bloom,
and wild thyme with fragrance far borne, and a wealth of strong-scented savory;
and let violet beds drink of the trickling spring.

[33] Then, let the hive itself, whether it be sewn of hollow bark, or woven of
pliant osier, have its entrances narrow; for winter with its cold congeals the
honey, while heat thaws and makes it run. Either trouble is alike to be feared
for the bees; nor is it with vain zeal that in their homes they smear the tiny
crevices with wax, fill the entrances with paste from flowers, and keep a store
of glue, gathered for this very purpose, more binding than lime or the pitch of
Phrygian Ida. Often, too, if report be true, they have made a snug home in
tunneled hiding places underground, and are found deep in the hollows of pumice
rock, or the cavern of a decayed tree. Yet keep them snug, smearing the chinks
of their chambers with smooth clay, and flinging thereon a few leaves. And
suffer no yew too near the hive, nor roast the reddening crab at your hearth;
and trust not a deep marsh or a place where the smell of mud is strong, or where
the hollow rocks ring when struck, and the echoes voice rebounds from the shock.

[51] For the rest, when the golden Sun has driven winter in rout beneath the
earth, and with summer light unlocked the sky, straightway they range through
glades and groves, cull bright flowers, and lightly sip the stream’s brink.
Hence it is that, glad with some strange joy, they cherish nest and nestlings;
hence they deftly mould fresh wax and fashion the gluey honey. Hence when you
look up and see the host, just freed from the hive, floating towards the starry
sky through the clear summer air – when you marvel at the dark cloud trailing
down the wind – mark it well; they are ever in quest of sweet waters and leafy
coverts. Here scatter the scents I prescribe – bruised balm, and the honeywort’s
lowly herb; raise a tinkling sound, and shake the Mighty Mother’s cymbals round
about. Of themselves they settle on the scented resting places; of themselves,
after their wont, will hide far within their cradling cells.

[67] But, if haply for battle they have gone forth – for strife with terrible
turmoil has often fallen on two kings; and straightway you may presage from afar
the fury of the crowd, and how their hearts thrill with war; for the warlike
ring of the hoarse clarion stirs the loiterers, and a sound is heard that is
like broken trumpet blasts. Then, all afire, they flock together: their wings
flash, they sharpen their stings with their beaks and make ready their arms.
Round their king, and even by his royal tent, they swarm in throngs, and with
loud cries challenge the foe. Therefore, when they have found a clear spring day
and open field, they sally forth from the gates. There is a clash; in high air
arises a din; they are mingled and massed in one great ball, then tumble
headlong: no thicker is hail from the sky, not so dense is the rain of acorns
from the shaken oak. In the midst of the ranks the chiefs themselves, with
resplendent wings, have mighty souls beating in tiny breasts, ever steadfast not
to yield, until the victor’s heavy hand has driven these or those to turn their
backs in flight. These storms of passion, these savage conflicts, by the tossing
of a little dust will be quelled and laid to rest.

[88] But when you have called both captains back from the field, give up to
death the meaner of look, that he prove no wasteful burden; let the nobler reign
in the palace alone. The one will be aglow with rough spots of gold for there
are two sorts: one is better, noble of mien and bright with gleaming scales; the
other squalid from sloth, and trailing ignobly a broad paunch. As twofold are
the features of the kings, so are the bodies of the subjects. For some are ugly
and unsightly, as when from out of deep dust comes the parched wayfarer, and
spits the dirt from his dried mouth. Other gleam, and flash in splendour, their
bodies all ablaze and flecked with equal drops of gold. This is the nobler
breed; from this, in the sky’s due season, you will strain sweet honey – yet not
so sweet as clear, and fit to subdue the harsh flavour of wine.

[103] But when the swarms flit aimlessly and sport in the air, scorning their
cells and leaving their hives chill, you must check their fickle spirit from
such idle play. No hard task is it to check them. Do you tear from the monarchs
their wings; while they tarry, no one will dare to go forth aloft, or pluck the
standards from the camp. Let there by gardens fragrant with saffron flowers to
invite them, and let the watchmen against thieves and birds, guardian Priapus,
lord of the Hellespont, protect them with his willow hook. Let him to whom such
care falls, himself bring thyme and laurestines from the high hills, and plant
them widely round their homes; himself harden his hand with stern toil; himself
plant in the ground fruitful slips and sprinkle kindly showers.

[116] In fact, were I not, with my task well-nigh done, about to furl my sails
and making haste to turn my prow to land, perchance I might sing what careful
tendance clothes rich gardens in flower, and might sing of Paestum whose rose
beds bloom twice yearly, how the endive rejoices in drinking streams, the
verdant banks in celery; how the cucumber, coiling through the grass, swells
into a paunch. Nor should I have passed in silence the late-flowering narcissus,
the twining tendril of the acanthus, pale ivy sprays, or the shore-loving
myrtle. For I call to mind how once under the towers of the Oebalian citadel
[Tarentum], where dark Galaesus waters the yellowing corn, I saw an old
Cilician, who occupied a few acres of unclaimed land, not rich enough for
ploughing, nor fit for pasturage, nor suited to the vine. Even so, planting
cabbages here and there among the brambles, and white lilies and vervain and
fine-seeded poppies, in happiness he equaled the wealth of kings, and returning
home late at night he used to load his table with an unbought banquet. First he
was in the spring to gather roses, and apples in the fall; and when grim winter
was still bursting rocks with her frost and braking the current of rivers with
ice, already he was cutting soft-haired hyacinths and chiding laggard summer and
the loitering zephyrs. Thus it was that he was still the first to be enriched
with teeming bees and a plenteous swarm, and first to gather from the squeezed
comb the frothing honey; his limes and laurestines were ever luxuriant, and all
the fruits which clothed his fertile trees in their early blossoming, so many
they kept in the ripeness of autumn. He would also plant out elms in rows,
though late in season, pears when quite hard, blackthorns already hung with
sloes, and planes already offering to drinkers the service of their shade. But
all this I must pass by, constrained by narrow bounds, and leave to others after
me to record.

[149] Come now, the qualities which Jove himself has given bees, I will unfold
– even the reward for which they followed the tuneful sounds and clashing
bronzes of the Curetes, and fed the king of heaven within the cave of Dicte.
They alone have children in common, hold the dwellings of their city jointly,
and pass their lives under the majesty of law. They alone know a fatherland and
fixed home, and in summer, mindful of the winter to come, spend toilsome days
and garner their gains into a common store. For some watch over the gatherings
of food, and under fixed covenant labour in the fields; some, within the
confines of their homes, lay down the narcissus’ tears and gluey gum from tree
bark as the first foundation of the comb, then hang aloft clinging wax; others
lead out the full-grown young, the nation’s hope; others pack purest honey, and
swell the cells with liquid nectar. To some it has fallen by lot to be sentries
at the gates, and in turn they watch the rains and clouds of heaven, or take the
load of incomers, or in martial array drive the drones, a lazy herd, from the
folds. All aglow is the work, and the fragrant honey is sweet with thyme. And
as, when the Cyclopes in haste forge bolts from tough ore, some with oxhide
bellows make the blasts come and go, others dip the hissing brass in the lake,
while Aetna groans under the anvils laid upon her; they, with mighty force, now
one, now another, raise their arms in measured cadence, and turn the iron with
gripping tongs – even so, if we may compare small things with great, an inborn
love of gain spurs on the Attic bees, each after its own office. The aged have
charge o the towns, the building of the hives, the fashioning of the cunningly
wrought houses. But the young betake them home in weariness, late at night,
their thighs freighted with thyme; far and wide they feed on arbutus, on
pale-green willows, on cassia and ruddy crocus, on the rich linden, and the
dusky hyacinth. All have on season to rest from labour, all one season to toil.
At dawn they pour from the gates, no loitering; again, when the star of eve has
warned them to withdraw from their pasture in the fields, then they seek their
homes, then they refresh their frames; a sound is heard, as they hum about the
entrances and on the thresholds. Anon, when they have laid them to rest in their
chambers, silence reigns into the night, and well-earned sleep seizes their
weary limbs. Nor yet, if rain impend, do they stray far from their stalls, or
trust the sky when eastern gales are near, but round about, beneath the shelter
of their city walls, draw water, and essay short flights; and often they raise
tiny stones, as unsteady barques take up ballast in a tossing sea, and with
these balance themselves amid the unsubstantial clouds. Often, too, as they
wander among rugged rocks they bruise their wings, and freely yield their lives
under their load – so deep is their love of flowers and their glory in begetting
honey.

[206] You will also marvel that this custom has found favour with bees, that
they indulge not in conjugal embraces, nor idly unnerve their bodies in love, or
bring forth young with travail, but of themselves gather their children in their
mouths from leaves and sweet herbs, of themselves provide a new monarch and tiny
burghers, and remodel their palaces and waxen realms. Therefore, though the
limit of a narrow span awaits the bees themselves – yet the race abides
immortal, for many a year stands firm the fortune of the house, and grandsires’
grandsires are numbered on the roll.

[210] Moreover, neither Egypt nor mighty Lydia, nor the Parthian tribes, nor
Median Hydaspes, show such homage to their king. While he is safe, all are of
one mind; when he is lost, straightway they break their fealty, and themselves
pull down the honey they have reared and tear up their trellised combs. He is
the guardian of their toils; to him they do reverence; all stand round him in
clamorous crowd, and attend him in throngs. Often they lift him on their
shoulders, for him expose their bodies to battle, and seek amid wounds
a glorious death.

[219] Let by such tokens and such instances, some have taught that the bees
received a share of the divine intelligence, and a draught of heavenly ether;
for God, they saw, pervades all things, earth and sea’s expanse and heaven’s
depth; from him the flocks and herds, men and beasts of every sort draw, each at
birth, the slender stream of life; to him all beings thereafter return, and,
when unmade, are restored; no place is there for death, but, still quick, they
fly unto the ranks of the stars, and mount to the heavens aloft.

[228] Whenever you would break into the close-packed dwelling and the honey
hoarded in their treasure houses, first with a draught of water sprinkle and
rinse your mouth, and in your hand hold forth searching smoke. Their rage is
beyond measure; when hurt, they breathe poison into their bites, and fastening
on the veins leave there their unseen stings and lay down their lives in the
wound. Twice they gather the teeming produce; two seasons are there for the
harvest – first, so soon as Taygete the Pleiad has shown her comely face to the
earth, and spurned with scornful foot the streams of Ocean, and when that same
star, fleeing before the sign of the water Fish, sinks sadly from heaven into
the wintry waves. But if you fear a rigorous winter, and would be lenient with
their future, and have pity for their crushed spirits and broken fortunes – yet
who would hesitate to fumigate them with thyme, and cut away the empty waxen
cells? For often the newt, unnoticed, has nibbled at the combs, the
light-shunning beetles cram the chambers, and the unhelpful drone seats him at
another’s board. Or the fierce hornet has rushed upon their unequal forces, or
the moths appear, a pestilent race, or the spider, hateful to Minerva, hangs in
the doorway her loose-woven nets. The more their hoards are drained, the more
eagerly will they press on to repair the ruin of their fallen race, filling up
their cell galleries and weaving their granaries with flower gum.

[251] But, since to bees as well has life brought the ills of man, if their
bodies droop with grievous disease – and this you can at once discern by no
uncertain signs: straightway, as they sicken, their colour changes, an unsightly
leanness mars their looks; forth from their doors they bear the bodies of those
bereft of life, and lead the mournful funeral train; or else, linked foot to
foot, there by the portal they hang, or within locked doors they linger, all
spiritless with hunger and torpid with pinching cold. Then is heard a duller
sound, a long-drawn buzz, as at time the chill South sighs in the woods, as the
fretted sea whistles with its ebbing surge, as seethes in close-barred furnaces
the devouring flame. Then would I have you burn forthwith fragrant gum, and give
them honey through pipes of reed, freely heartening them, and calling the weary
to their familiar food. It will be well, too, to blend the flavour of pounded
galls, and dried rose leaves, or must made rich over a strong fire, or dried
clusters from the Psithian vine, with Attic thyme and strong-smelling centaury.
A flower, too, there is in the meadows, which farmers have called amellus,
a plant easy for searchers to find, for from a single clump it lifts a vast
growth. Golden is the disk, but in the petals, streaming profusely round, there
is a crimson gleam amid the dark violet. Often with its woven garlands have the
gods’ altars been decked; its flavour is bitter to the tongue; shepherds cull it
in meadows cropped by the flock, and by Mella’s winding streams. This plant’s
roots you must boil in fragrant wine, and set for food at their doors in full
baskets.

[281] But if anyone’s whole stock has failed him, and he knows not how to
restore the race in a new line, then it is also time to reveal the famed device
of the Arcadian master [Aristaeus], and the mode whereby often, in the past, the
putrid blood of slain bullocks has engendered bees. From its fount I will unfold
the whole story, tracing it back from its first source. For where the favoured
people of Macedonian Canopus [Egypt] dwell by the still waters of the flooded
Nile, and sail in painted barges about their fields, there, where the borderland
of quivered Persia presses close and the rushing river splits up into seven
separate mouths after sweeping all the way down from the swarthy Indians
[Ethiopians] and with its black sands fertilizes verdant Egypt, there the whole
region rests its sure hope of salvation upon this device.

[295] First is chosen a place, small and straitened for this very purpose. This
they confine with a narrow roof of tiles and close walls, and towards the four
winds add four windows with slanting light. Then a bullock is sought, one just
arching his horns on a brow of two summer’s growth. Struggle as he will, both
his nostrils are stopped up, and the breath of his mouth; then he is beaten to
death, and his flesh is pounded to a pulp through the unbroken hide. As thus he
lies, they leave him in his prison, and strew beneath his sides broken boughs,
thyme, and fresh cassia. This is done when the zephyrs begin to stir the waves,
before ever the meadows blush with their fresh hues, before the chattering
swallow hangs her nest from the rafters. Meantime the moisture, warming in the
softened bones, ferments, and creatures of wondrous wise to view, footless at
first, soon with buzzing wings as well, swarm together, and more and more essay
the light air, until, like a shower pouring from summer clouds, they burst
forth, or like arrows from the string’s rebound, when the light-armed Parthians
enter on the opening battle.  What god, ye Muses, forged for us this device?
Whence did man’s strange adventuring take its rise? Aristaeus the shepherd,
quitting Tempe by the Peneus, when – so runs the tale – his bees were lost
through sickness and hunger, sorrowfully stopped beside the sacred fount at the
stream’s head, and with much complaint called on his mother thus: “O mother,
mother Cyrene, who dwell in this flood’s depths, why, from the gods’ glorious
line – if indeed, as you say, Thymbraean Apollo is my father – did you give me
birth, to be hated of the fates? Or whither is your love for me banished? Why
did you bid me hope for Heaven? Lo, even this very crown of my mortal life,
which the skilful tending of crops and cattle had scarce wrought out for me for
all my endeavour – though you are my mother, I resign. Come, and with your own
hand tear up my fruitful woods; put hostile flame to my stalls, destroy my
crops, burn my seedlings, and swing the stout axe against my vines, if such
loathing for my honour has seized you.”

[333] But his mother heard the cry from her bower beneath the river’s depths.
About her the Nymphs were spinning fleeces of Miletus, dyed with rich glassy hue
– Drymo and Xantho, Ligea and Phyllodoce, their shining tresses floating over
snowy necks; Nesaea and Spio, Thalia and Cymodoce [four Nereids]; Cydippe and
golden-haired Lycorias – a maiden one, the other having but felt the first
birth-throes; Clio and Beroe, her sister, daughters of Ocean both, both arrayed
in gold, and both in dappled hides [as huntresses]; Ephyre and Opis, and Asian
Deiopea, and fleet Arethusa, her arrows laid aside at last. Among these Clymene
was telling of Vulcan’s baffled care, of the wiles and stolen joys of Mars, and
from Chaos on was rehearsing the countless loves of the gods. And while, charmed
by the strain, they unrolled the soft coils from their spindles, again the wail
of Aristaeus smote upon his mother’s ear, and all upon their crystal thrones
were startled. Yet, first of all the sisters, Arethusa, looking forth, raised
her golden head above the water’s brim, and cried from afar: “O sister Cyrene,
not vain was your alarm at this loud lament. ‘Tis even he, your own beloved,
your Aristaeus, standing sadly and in tears by the waters of our father, and
crying out on you by name for cruelty.”

[357] To her the mother, her soul smitten with strange dread cries: “O bring
him, bring him to us; lawful it is for him to tread the threshold divine.” And
withal, she bade the deep streams part asunder far, that so the youth might
enter in. And lo, the wave, arched mountain-like, stood round about, and,
welcoming him within the vast recess ushered him beneath the stream. And now,
marveling at his mother’s home, a realm of waters, at the lakes locked in
caverns, and the echoing groves, he went on his way, and, dazed by the mighty
rush of waters, he gazed on all the rivers, as, each in his own place, they
glide under the great earth – Phasis and Lycus, the fount whence deep Enipeus
first breaks forth, whence Father Tiber, whence the streams of Anio and rocky,
roaring Hypanis, and Mysian Caïcus, and Eridanus, on whose bull’s brow are two
gilded horns: no other stream of mightier force flows through the fertile fields
to join the violet sea. Soon as he reached the bower with its hanging roof of
stone, and Cyrene heard the tale of her son’s idle tears, the sisters, in due
order, pour on his hands clear spring-waters, and bring smooth-shorn napkins.
Some load the board with the feast, and in turn set on the brimming cups; the
altars blaze up with Panchaean fires. Then cried his mother: “Take the goblets
of Maeonian wine’; pour we a libation to Ocean!” And she prayed to Ocean,
universal father, and the sister Nymphs, who guard the hundred forests and
a hundred streams. Thrice with clear nectar she sprinkles the glowing hearth;
thrice the flame, shooting up to the rooftop, gleamed afresh. With this omen to
cheer his heart, she thus her self began:

[387] “In Neptune’s Carpathian flood there dwells a seer, Proteus, of sea-green
hue, who traverses the mighty main in his car drawn by fishes and a team of
two-footed steeds. Even now he revisits the havens of Thessaly and his native
Pallene. To him we Nymphs do reverence, and aged Nereus himself; for the seer
has knowledge of all things – what is, what hath been, what is in train before
long to happen – for so has it seemed good to Neptune, whose monstrous herds and
unsightly seals he pastures beneath the wave. Him, my son, you must first take
in fetters, that he may unfold to you all the cause of the sickness, and bless
the issue. For without force he will give you no counsel, nor shall you bend him
by prayer. With stern force and fetters make fast the captive; thereon alone his
wiles will shatter themselves in vain. I myself, when the sun has kindled his
noonday heat, when the grass is athirst, and the shade is now welcome to the
flock, will guide you to the aged one’s retreat, whither when weary he retires,
so that you may assail him with ease as he lies asleep. But when you hold him in
the grasp of hands and fetters, then will manifold forms baffle you, and figures
of wild beasts. For of a sudden he will become a bristly boar, a deadly tiger,
a scaly serpent, or a lioness with tawny neck; or he will give forth the fierce
roar of flame, and thus slip from his fetters, or he will melt into fleeting
water and be gone. But the more he turn himself into all shapes, the more, my
son, should you tighten his fetters, until after his last changes of body he
become such as you saw when he closed his eyes at the beginning of slumber.”

[415] She spoke, and shed abroad ambrosia’s fragrant stream, wherewith she
steeped her son’s whole frame: and lo, a sweet effluence breathed from his
smoothened locks, and vigour and suppleness passed into his limbs. There is
a vast cavern, hollowed in a mountain’s side, whither many a wave is driven by
the wind, then separates into receding inlets – at times a haven most sure for
storm-caught mariners. Within, Proteus shelters himself with the barrier of
a huge rock. Here the Nymph stations the youth in ambush, away from the light;
she herself, veiled in mist, stands aloof. And now the Dog Star, fiercely
parching the thirsty Indians, was ablaze in heaven, and the fiery Sun had
consumed half his course; the grass was withering and the hollow streams, in
their parched throats, were scorched and baked by the rays down to the slime,
when Proteus came from the waves, in quest of his wonted cave. About him the
watery race of the vast deep gamboled, scattering afar the briny spray. The
seals lay them down to sleep, here and there along the shore; he himself – even
as at times the warder of a sheepfold on the hills, when Vesper brings the
steers home from pasture, and the cry of bleating lambs whets the wolf’s hunger
– sits down on a rock in the midst and counts their number. Soon as the chance
came to Aristaeus, he scarce suffered the aged one to settle his weary limbs,
before he burst upon him with a loud cry and surprised him in fetters as he
lies. On his part, the seer forgets not his craft, but changes himself into all
wondrous shapes – into flame and hideous beast and flowing river. But when no
stratagem wins escape, vanquished he returns to himself, and at last speaks with
human voice: “Why, who,” he cried, “most presumptuous of youths, bade you invade
our home? Or what seek you hence?” But he: “You know, Proteus; you know of
yourself, nor may one deceive you in aught, but give up your wish to deceive.
Following the counsel of Heaven, we are come to seek hence an oracle for our
weary fortunes.” So much he spoke. On this the seer, yielding at last to mighty
force, rolled on him eyes ablaze with grey-green light, and grimly gnashing his
teeth, thus opened his lips to tell of fate’s decrees:

[453] “It is a god, no other, whose anger pursues you: Great is the crime you
are paying for; this punishment, far less than you deserve, unhappy Orpheus
arouses against you – did not Fate interpose – and rages implacably for the loss
of his bride. She, in headlong flight along the river, if only she might escape
you, saw not, doomed maiden, amid the deep grass the monstrous serpent at her
feet that guarded the banks. But her sister band of Dryads filled the
mountaintops with their cries; the towers of Rhodope wept, and the Pangaean
heights, and the martial land [Thrace] or Rhesus, the Getae and Hebrus and
Orithyia, Acte’s child. But he, solacing an arching heart with music from his
hollow shell, sang of you, dear wife, sang of you to himself on the lonely
shore, of you as day drew nigh, of you as day departed. He even passed through
the jaws of Taenarum, the lofty portals of Dis, the grove that is murky with
black terror, and made his way to the land of the dead with its fearful king and
hearts no human prayers can soften. Stirred by his song, up from the lowest
realms of Erebeus came the unsubstantial shades, the phantoms of those who lie
in darkness, as many as the myriads of birds that shelter among the leaves when
evening or a wintry shower drives them from the hills – women and men, and
figures of great-souled heroes, their life now done, boys and girls unwed, and
sons placed on the pyre before their fathers’ eyes. But round them are the black
ooze and unsightly reeds of Cocytus, the unlovely mere enchaining them with its
sluggish water, and Styx holding them fast within this ninefold circles. Still
more: the very house of Death and deepest abysses of Hell were spellbound, and
the Furies with livid snakes entwined in their hair; Cerberus stood agape and
his triple jaws forgot to bark; the wind subsided, and Ixion’s wheel came to
a stop.

[485] “And now, as he retraced his steps, he had avoided all mischance, and the
regained Eurydice was nearing the upper world, following behind – for that
condition had Proserpine imposed – when a sudden frenzy seized Orpheus, unwary
in his love, a frenzy meet for pardon, did Hell know how to pardon! He halted,
and on the very verge of light, unmindful, alas, and vanquished in purpose, on
Eurydice, now regained looked back! In that instant all his toil was split like
water, the ruthless tyrant’s pact was broken and thrice a peal of thunder was
heard amid the pools of Avernus. She cried: ‘What madness, Orpheus, what
dreadful madness has brought disaster alike upon you and me, pour soul? See,
again the cruel Fates call me back, and sleep seals my swimming eyes. And now
farewell! I am borne away, covered in night’s vast pall, and stretching towards
you strengthless hands, regained, alas! no more.’ She spoke, and straightway
from his sight, like smoke mingling with thin air, vanished afar and saw him not
again, as he vainly clutched at the shadows with so much left unsaid; nor did
the ferryman of Orcus suffer him again to pass the barrier of the marsh. What
could he do? Whither turn, twice robbed of his wife? With what tears move Hell?
To what deities address his prayers? She indeed, already death-cold, was afloat
in the Stygian barque. Of him they tell that for seven whole months day after
day beneath a lofty crag beside lonely Strymon’s stream he wept, and in the
shelter of cool dales unfolded his tale, charming tigers and drawing oaks with
his song: even as a nightingale, mourning beneath a poplar’s shade, bewails her
young ones’ loss, when a heartless ploughman, watching their resting place, has
plucked them unfledged from the nest: the mother weeps all night long, as,
perched on a branch, she repeats her piteous song and fills all around with
plaintive lamentation. No thought of love or wedding song could bend his soul.
Alone he roamed the frozen North, along the icy Tanais, and the fields ever
wedded to Riphaean snows, mourning his lost Eurydice and Pluto’s cancelled boon;
till the Ciconian women, resenting such devotion, in the midsts of their sacred
rites and their midnight Bacchic orgies, tore the youth limb from limb and flung
him over the far-spread plains. And even when Oeagrian Hebrus rolled in
mid-current that head, severed from its marble neck, the disembodied voice and
the tongue, now cold for ever, called with departing breath on Eurydice – ah,
poor Eurydice! ‘Eurydice’ the banks re-echoed, all along the stream.”

[528] Thus Proteus, and at a bound plunged into the deep sea, and where he
plunged, whirled the water into foam beneath the eddy. Cyrene stayed, and
straightway spoke to the startled youth: “You may dismiss from your mind the
care that troubles it. This is the whole cause of the sickness, and hence it is
that the Nymphs, with whom she used to tread the dance in the deep groves, have
sent this wretched havoc on your bees. You must offer a suppliant’s gifts, sue
for peace, and pay homage to the gentle maidens of the woods; for they will
grant pardon to prayers, and relax their wrath. But first I will tell you in
order the manner of your supplication. Pick out four choice bulls, of surpassing
form, that now graze among your herds on the heights of green Lycaeus, and as
many heifers of unyoked neck. For these set up four altars by the stately
shrines of the goddesses, and drain the sacrificial blood from their throats,
but leave the bodies of the steers within the leafy grove. Later, when the ninth
Dawn displays her rising beams, you must offer to Orpheus funeral dues of
Lethe’s poppies, slay a black ewe, and revisit the grove. Then with Eurydice
appeased you should honour her with the slaying of a calf.”

[548] Tarrying not, he straightway does his mother’s bidding. He comes to the
shrine, raises the altars appointed, and leads there four choice bulls, of
surpassing form, and as many heifers of unyoked neck. Later, when the ninth Dawn
had ushered in her rising beams, he offers to Orpheus the funeral dues, and
revisits the grove. But here they espy a portent, sudden and wondrous to tell
– throughout the paunch, amid the molten flesh of the oxen, bees buzzing and
swarming forth from the ruptured sides, then trailing in vast clouds, till at
last on a treetop they stream together, and hang in clusters from the bending
boughs.

[559] So much I say in addition to the care of fields, of cattle, and of trees,
while great Caesar thundered in war by deep Euphrates and bestowed a victor’s
laws on willing nations, and essayed the path to Heaven. In those days I,
Virgil, was nursed by sweet Parthenope [the Siren of Naples], and rejoiced in
the arts of inglorious ease – I who toyed with shepherds’ songs, and, in youth’s
boldness, sang of you, Tityrus, under the canopy of spreading beech.
